lifestyle  governs mobile choice  faster  better or funkier hardware alone is not going to help phone firms sell more handsets  research suggests.  instead  phone firms keen to get more out of their customers should not just be pushing the technology for its own sake. consumers are far more interested in how handsets fit in with their lifestyle than they are in screen size  onboard memory or the chip inside  shows an in-depth study by handset maker ericsson.  historically in the industry there has been too much focus on using technology   said dr michael bjorn  senior advisor on mobile media at ericsson s consumer and enterprise lab.  we have to stop saying that these technologies will change their lives   he said.  we should try to speak to consumers in their own language and help them see how it fits in with what they are doing   he told the bbc news website.  for the study  ericsson interviewed 14 000 mobile phone owners on the ways they use their phone.  people s habits remain the same   said dr bjorn.  they just move the activity into the mobile phone as it s a much more convenient way to do it.   one good example of this was diary-writing among younger people  he said. while diaries have always been popular  a mobile phone -- especially one equipped with a camera -- helps them keep it in a different form. youngsters  use of text messages also reflects their desire to chat and keep in contact with friends and again just lets them do it in a slightly changed way. dr bjorn said that although consumers do what they always did but use a phone to do it  the sheer variety of what the new handset technologies make possible does gradually drive new habits and lifestyles. ericsson s research has shown that consumers divide into different  tribes  that use phones in different ways. dr bjorn said groups dubbed  pioneers  and  materialists  were most interested in trying new things and were behind the start of many trends in phone use.  for instance   he said   older people are using sms much more than they did five years ago.  this was because younger users  often the children of ageing mobile owners  encouraged older people to try it so they could keep in touch.  another factor governing the speed of change in mobile phone use was the simple speed with which new devices are bought by pioneers and materialists. only when about 25% of people have handsets with new innovations on them  such as cameras  can consumers stop worrying that if they send a picture message the person at the other end will be able to see it.  once this significant number of users is passed  use of new innovations tends to take off. dr bjorn said that early reports of camera phone usage in japan seemed to imply that the innovation was going to be a flop. however  he said  now 45% of the japanese people ericsson questioned use their camera phone at least once a month. in 2003 the figure was 29%. similarly  across europe the numbers of people taking snaps with cameras is starting to rise. in 2003 only 4% of the people in the uk took a phonecam snap at least once a month. now the figure is 14%. similar rises have been seen in many other european nations. dr bjorn said that people also used their camera phones in very different ways to film and even digital cameras.  usage patterns for digital cameras are almost exactly replacing usage patterns for analogue cameras   he said. digital cameras tend to be used on significant events such as weddings  holidays and birthdays. by contrast  he said  camera phones were being used much more to capture a moment and were being woven into everyday life.
moving mobile improves golf swing a mobile phone that recognises and responds to movements has been launched in japan.  the motion-sensitive phone - officially titled the v603sh - was developed by sharp and launched by vodafone s japanese division. devised mainly for mobile gaming  users can also access other phone functions using a pre-set pattern of arm movements. the phone will allow golf fans to improve their swing via a golfing game.  those who prefer shoot- em-ups will be able to use the phone like a gun to shoot the zombies in the mobile version of sega s house of the dead. the phone comes with a tiny motion-control sensor  a computer chip that responds to movement.  other features include a display screen that allows users to watch tv and can rotate 180 degrees. it also doubles up as an electronic musical instrument. users have to select a sound from a menu that includes clapping  tambourine and maracas and shake their phone to create a beat. it is being recommended for the karaoke market. the phone will initially be available in japan only and is due to go on sale in mid-february. the new gadget could make for interesting people-watching among japanese commuters  who are able to access their mobiles on the subway. fishing afficiandos in south korea are already using a phone that allows them to simulate the movement of a rod. the ph-s6500 phone  dubbed a sports-leisure gadget  was developed by korean phone giant pantech and can also be used by runners to measure calorie consumption and distance run.
bt boosts its broadband packages british telecom has said it will double the broadband speeds of most of its home and business customers.  the increased speeds will come at no extra charge and follows a similar move by internet service provider aol. many bt customers will now have download speeds of 2mbps  although there are usage allowances of between one gigabyte and 30 gigabytes a month. the new speeds start to come into effect on 17 february for home customers and 1 april for businesses.  britain is now broadband britain   said duncan ingram  bt s managing director  broadband and internet services. he added:  ninety percent of our customers will see real increases in speed.   these speed increases will give people the opportunity to do a lot more with their broadband connections   he said. upload speeds - the speed at which information is sent from a pc via broadband - will remain at the same speed  said mr ingram. despite the increases  bt will continue to have usage allowances for home customers.  the allowances are extremely generous   said mr ingram  for what we are seeing in the market place - they are really not an issue.  bt will begin enforcing the allowances in the summer. customers who exceed the amounts will either be able to pay for a bigger allowance or see their download speeds reduced. bt now has a 36% share of the broadband market - down from 39% - which is becoming increasingly competitive. in the last few months  many rival isps have begun to offer 2mbps services  including aol  plusnet and uk online.  but britain continues to lag behind some countries - especially japan and south korea - which offer broadband speeds of up to 40mbps. but mr ingram said it was important to  separate hype from reality . he said that a limited number of people with those connections consistently received speeds of 40mbps. customers will not see their connections double immediately on 17 february. mr ingram said there would be a roll out across the network in order to prevent any problems.
peer-to-peer nets  here to stay  peer-to-peer (p2p) networks are here to stay  and are on the verge of being exploited by commercial media firms  says a panel of industry experts.  once several high-profile legal cases against file-sharers are resolved this year  firms will be very keen to try and make money from p2p technology. the expert panel probed the future of p2p at the consumer electronics show in las vegas earlier in january. the first convictions for p2p piracy were handed out in the us in january. william trowbridge and michael chicoine pleaded guilty to charges that they infringed copyright by illegally sharing music  movies and software. since the first successful file-sharing network napster was forced to close down  the entertainment industry has been nervous and critical of p2p technology  blaming it for falling sales and piracy. but that is going to change very soon  according to the panel.  the music and film industries have started some big legal cases against owners of legitimate p2p networks - which are not illegal in themselves - and of individuals accused of distributing pirated content over networks. but they have slowly realised that p2p is a good way to distribute content  said travis kalanick  founder and chairman of p2p network red swoosh  and soon they are all going to want a slice of it. they are just waiting to come up with  business models  that work for them  which includes digital rights management and copy-protection standards.  but  until the legal actions are resolved  experimentation with p2p cannot not happen  said michael weiss  president of streamcast networks. remembering the furore around vcrs when they first came out  mr weiss said:  old media always tries to stop new media.  when they can t stop it  they try to control it. then they figure out how to make money and they always make a lot of money.  once the courts decided that the vcr in itself was not an illegal technology  the film studios turned it into an extremely lucrative business. in august 2004  the san francisco-based us court of appeals ruled in favour of grokster and streamcast  two file-sharing networks. the court said they were essentially in the same position that sony was in the 1980s vcr battle  and said that the networks themselves could not be deemed as illegal.  p2p networks usually do not rely on dedicated servers for the transfer of files. instead it uses direct connections between computers - or clients. there are now many different types of p2p systems than work in different ways. p2p nets can be used to share any kind of file  like photos  free software  licensed music and any other digital content. the bbc has already decided to embrace the technology. it aims to offer most of its own programmes for download this year and it will use p2p technology to distribute them. the files would be locked seven days after a programme aired making rights management easier to control. but the technology is still demonised and misunderstood by many. the global entertainment industry says more than 2.6 billion copyrighted music files are downloaded every month  and about half a million films are downloaded a day. legal music download services  like apple itunes  napster  have rushed into the music marketplace to try and lure file-sharers away from free content. sales of legally-downloaded songs grew tenfold in 2004  with 200 million tracks bought online in the us and europe in 12 months  the ifpi reported this week. but such download services are very different from p2p networks  not least because of the financial aspect.  there are several money-spinning models that could turn p2p into a golden egg for commercial entertainment companies. paid-for-pass-along  in which firms receive money each time a file is shared  along with various drm solutions and advertiser-based options are all being considered.  we see there are going to be different models for commoditising p2p   said marc morgenstern  vice president of anti-piracy firm overpeer.   consumers are hungry for it and we will discover new models together   agreed mr morgenstern. but many net users will continue to ignore the entertainment industry s potential controlling grip on content and p2p technology by continuing to use it for their own creations. unsigned bands  for example  use p2p networks to distribute their music effectively  which also draws the attention of record companies looking for new artists to sign.  increasingly  what you are seeing on p2p is consumer-created content   said derek broes  from microsoft.  they will probably pay an increasing role in helping p2p spread   he said. looking into p2p s future  file sharing is just the beginning for p2p networks  as far as mr broes is concerned.  once some of these issues are resolved  you are going to see aggressive movement to protect content  but also in ways that are unimaginable now   he said.  file-sharing is the tip of the iceberg.
pompeii gets digital make-over the old-fashioned audio tour of historical places could soon be replaced with computer-generated images that bring the site to life.  a european union-funded project is looking at providing tourists with computer-augmented versions of archaeological attractions. it would allow visitors a glimpse of life as it was originally lived in places such as pompeii. it could pave the way for a new form of cultural tourism.  the technology would allow digital people and other computer-generated elements to be combined with the actual view seen by tourists as they walk around an historical site.  the lifeplus project is part of the eu s information society technologies initiative aimed at promoting user-friendly technology and enhancing european cultural heritage. engineers and researchers working in the europe-wide consortium have come up with a prototype augmented-reality system. it would require the visitor to wear a head-mounted display with a miniature camera and a backpack computer. the camera captures the view and feeds it to software on the computer where the visitor s viewpoint is combined with animated virtual elements. at pompeii for example  the visitor would not just see the frescos  taverns and villas that have been excavated  but also people going about their daily life. augmented reality has been used to create special effects in films such as troy and lord of the rings and in computer gaming.   this technology can now be used for much more than just computer games   said professor nadia magnenat-thalman of the swiss research group miralab.   we are  for the first time  able to run this combination of software processes to create walking  talking people with believable clothing  skin and hair in real-time   she said. unlike virtual reality  which delivers an entirely computer-generated scene to the viewer  the lifeplus project is about combining digital and real views. crucial to the technique is the software that interprets the visitor s view and provides an accurate match between the real and virtual elements. the software capable of doing this has been developed by a uk company  2d3. andrew stoddart  chief scientist at 2d3  said that the eu project has been driven by a new desire to bring the past to life.  the popularity of television documentaries and dramatisations using computer-generated imagery to recreate scenes from ancient history demonstrates the widespread appeal of bringing ancient cultures to life   he said.
security scares spark browser fix microsoft is working on a new version of its internet explorer web browser.  the revamp has been prompted by microsoft s growing concern with security as well as increased competition from rival browsers. microsoft said the new version will be far less vulnerable to the bugs that make its current browser a favourite of tech-savvy criminals. test versions of the new program  called ie 7  are due to be released by the summer.  the announcement about internet explorer was made by bill gates  microsoft chairman and chief software architect  during a keynote speech at the rsa security conference currently being held in san francisco. although details were scant  mr gates  said ie7 would include new protections against viruses  spyware and phishing scams. this last category of threats involves criminals setting up spoof websites that look identical to those of banks and try to trick people into handing over login and account information.  in a bid to shore up the poor security in ie 6  microsoft has regularly issued updates to patch loopholes exploited by criminals and the makers of nuisance programs such as spyware. earlier this month it released a security bulletin that patched eight critical security holes - some of which were found in the ie browser. microsoft has also made a series of acquisitions of small firms that specialise in computer security. one of the first fruits of these acquisitions appeared last month with the release of a microsoft anti-spyware program. an own-brand anti-virus program is due to follow by the end of 2005. the decision to make internet explorer 7 is widely seen as a u-turn because  before now  microsoft said it had no need to update the browser. typically new versions of its browser appear with successive versions of the windows operating system. a new version of ie was widely expected to debut with the next version of windows  codenamed longhorn  which is due to appear in 2006. the current version of internet explorer is four years old  and is widely seen as falling behind rivals such as firefox and opera. there are also persistent rumours that search engine google is poised to produce its own brand browser based on firefox. in particular the firefox browser has been winning fans and users since its first full version was released in november 2004. estimates of how many users firefox has won over vary widely. according to market statistics gathered by websidestory  firefox s market share is now about 5% of all users. however  other browser stat gatherers say the figure is closer to 15%. some technical websites report that a majority of their visitors use the firefox browser. internet explorer still dominates with a share of about 90% but this is down from a peak of almost 96% in mid-2004.
argonaut founder rebuilds empire jez san  the man behind the argonaut games group which went into administration a week ago  has bought back most of the company.  the veteran games developer has taken over the cambridge-based just add monsters studios and the london subsidiary morpheme. the argonaut group went into administration due to a severe cash crisis  firing about half of its staff. in august it had warned of annual losses of £6m for the year to 31 july.  jez san is one of the key figures in the uk s games industry. the developer  who received an obe in 2002  was estimated to have been worth more than £200m at the peak of the dotcom boom.  he founded argonaut in 1982 and has been behind titles such as 1993 starfox game. more recently it was behind the harry potter games for the playstation. but  like all software developers  argonaut needed a constant flow of deals with publishers. in august it warned of annual losses of £6m  blaming delays in signing new contracts and tough conditions in the software industry. the group s three subsidiaries were placed in administration a week ago  with mr sans resigning as the company s ceo and some 100 staff being fired. after the latest round of cuts  there were 80 workers at argonaut headquarters in edgware in north london  with 17 at its morpheme offices in kentish town  london  and 22 at the just add monsters base in cambridge. mr san has re-emerged  buying back morpheme and just add monsters.  we are pleased to announce the sale of these two businesses as going concerns   said david rubin of administrators david rubin & partners.  this has saved over 40 jobs as well as the substantial employment claims that would have arisen had the sales not been achieved.  mr rubin said the administrators were in talks over the sale of the argonaut software division in edgware and were hopeful of finding a buyer.  this is a very difficult time for all the employees there  but i salute their commitment to the business while we work towards a solution   he said. some former employees are angry at the way cash crisis was handled. one told bbc news online that the staff who had been fired had been  financially ruined in the space of a day .
viewers to be able to shape tv imagine editing titanic down to watch just your favourite bits or cutting out the slushier moments of star wars to leave you with a bare bones action-fest.  manipulating your favourite films to make a more personalised movie is just the beginning of an ambitious new 7.5m euro (£5.1m) project funded by the european union. new media for a new millennium (nm2) will have as its endgame the development of a completely new media genre  which will allow audiences to create their own media worlds based on their specific interests or tastes. viewers will be able to participate in storylines  manipulate plots and even the sets and props of tv shows. bt is one of 13 partners involved in the project. it will be contributing software that was originally designed to spot anomalies in cctv pictures. the software uses content recognition algorithms. the three-year project will work on seven productions as it develops a set of software tools that will allow viewers to edit content to their needs.  one of the productions will be a experimental television show where the plot will be driven by text messages from the tv audience.  participants will text selected words which will impact how the characters in the drama interact. it is being developed in finland and will be shown to finnish tv audiences. another team will work on the bbc s big budget drama of mervyn peake s gothic fantasy gormenghast. it will be re-engineered to allow people to choose a variety of edited versions.  the bbc is allowing us access to the material so that we can prove the technology and the principles   explained dr doug williams of bt  who will be nm2 s technical project manager.  the tv at the moment is a relatively dumb box which receives signals. this project is about teaching the machine to look at content like lego blocks that can be reassembled to make perfect sense   he said.  at the moment we have interactive gaming and a limited form of interactive tv which usually means allowing audiences to vote on shows. we are hoping to occupy the space in-between   he added.  nm2 s co-ordinator peter stollenmayer explained that the new genre would radically alter the role of the audience.   viewers will be able to interact directly with the medium and influence what they see and hear according to their personal tastes and wishes   he said.  media users will no longer be passive viewers but become active engagers.  it will also be important that the tools are sophisticated enough to obey the complex rules of cinematography and editing said john wyver  from tv producer illuminations television limited  which is also involved in the project.  it s not just a matter of stringing together the romantic or action portions of a production   said mr wyver.  the tool has to know which bits fit together both visually  by observing the time-honoured rules that go in editing  and in terms of the story.   only then will the personalised version both make sense and be aesthetically pleasing   he added. mr wyver is planning a production entitled the golden age  about renaissance art. it will allow viewers to create a so-called media world based on their own specific areas of interest such as poetry  music and architecture. other productions that the nm2 team will make range from news  documentaries to a romantic comedy drama.
china  ripe  for media explosion asia is set to drive global media growth to 2008 and beyond  with china and india filling the two top spots  analysts have predicted.  japan  south korea and singapore will also be strong players  but china s demographics give it the edge  a media conference in london heard. the world s most populous country - population 1.3bn - now has about 200 million middle-class consumers. forty per cent fall in the key 16 to 35-year-old demographic. as a result  it is attracting huge foreign investment in media and communications  analysts told the financial times new media and broadcasting conference last week. interest in china among international media groups has surged in recent months after beijing issued rules allowing foreign investment in joint-venture television  radio and film production companies. news corporation  viacom and sony pictures are among the big names involved in joint ventures with chinese players.  more than 700 million chinese listen to 1 000 radio stations  while 200 tv stations broadcast 2 900 channels. china central television (cctv)  the state broadcaster  claims an audience of more than a billion people. of the country s 360 million households  100 million receive cable tv programmes. the rest could be a potential audience for satellite broadcasting which china plans to launch in 2006. the state administration of radio  film and television (sarft)  which regulates broadcasting  plans to move all programmes to digital by 2015. the continuing roll-out of new digital channels has boosted demand for quality content  creating significant opportunities for both chinese and foreign content providers.  but according to recent reports from china  the authorities have tightened controls over foreign investment in tv production joint ventures. it has limited most foreign companies to only one joint venture and banned the involvement of any found to be  unfriendly   according to reports. the sarft said:  there is a very strong ideological component to production of broadcast television programmes.  it added:  china must understand the political tendencies and background of overseas partners and prevent joint ventures or cooperation from bringing harmful foreign thinking or culture into our production sector.  according to the financial times  china correspondent  the new rules highlight the political sensitivities that surround foreign involvement in china s media sector. this is despite beijing s decision to open the state-dominated sector to international investment.  as well as traditional broadcasting  chinese and foreign entrepreneurs alike see fortunes waiting to be made in new media  like mobile services and online gaming. mobile games already account for 15% of revenues from china s 340 million mobile users.  online gaming sales are predicted to top a billion us dollars next year  according to the uk-based journal screen digest. the video market is also seen as a big opportunity  although piracy levels are still very high despite an anti-piracy drive during the past year. in the cinema industry the deployment of digital screens is being accelerated. this is not just to modernise venues but also to curb piracy and regulate distribution. li ruigang  president of the commercial broadcaster shanghai media group  told the conference that china s new media market  is already experiencing explosive growth . it was particularly strong in charged broadband services and mobile value-added services. leading china-watcher  and founder of the cga consultancy jeanne-marie gescher  agreed that the time was ripe for foreign media groups to tap china s huge media market potential.  china s media are now driven by investors who do not care how people consume media - they just want people to consume more of it   mrs gescher concluded.
broadband fuels online change fast web access is encouraging more people to express themselves online  research suggests.  a quarter of broadband users in britain regularly upload content and have personal sites  according to a report by uk think-tank demos. it said that having an always-on  fast connection is changing the way people use the internet. more than five million households in the uk have broadband and that number is growing fast.  the demos report looked at the impact of broadband on people s net habits. it found that more than half of those with broadband logged on to the web before breakfast. one in five even admitted to getting up in the middle of the night to browse the web.  more significantly  argues the report  broadband is encouraging people to take a more active role online. it found that one in five post something on the net everyday  ranging from comments or opinions on sites to uploading photographs.  broadband is putting the  me  in media as it shifts power from institutions and into the hands of the individual   said john craig  co-author of the demos report.  from self-diagnosis to online education  broadband creates social innovation that moves the debate beyond simple questions of access and speed.  the demos report  entitled broadband britain: the end of asymmetry   was commissioned by net provider aol.  broadband is moving the perception of the internet as a piece of technology to an integral part of home life in the uk   said karen thomson  chief executive of aol uk   with many people spending time on their computers as automatically as they might switch on the television or radio.  according to analysts nielsen//netratings  more than 50% of the 22.8 million uk net users regularly accessing the web from home each month are logging on at high speed they spend twice as long online than people on dial-up connections  viewing an average of 1 444 pages per month. the popularity of fast net access is growing  partly fuelled by fierce competition over prices and services.
halo 2 sells five million copies microsoft is celebrating bumper sales of its xbox sci-fi shooter  halo 2.  the game has sold more than five million copies worldwide since it went on sale in mid-november  the company said. halo 2 has proved popular online  with gamers notching up a record 28 million hours playing the game on xbox live. according to microsoft  nine out of 10 xbox live members have played the game for an average of 91 minutes per session.  the sequel to the best-selling need for speed: underground has inched ahead of the competition to take the top slot in the official uk games charts. the racing game moved up one spot to first place  nudging gta: san andreas down to second place. halo 2 dropped one place to five  while half-life 2 fell to number nine. last week s new releases  goldeneye: rogue agent and killzone  both failed to make it into the top 10  debuting at number 11 and 12 respectively.  record numbers of warcraft fans are settling in the games online world. on the opening day of the world of warcraft massive multi-player online game more than 200 000 players signed up to play. on the evening of the first day more than 100 000 players were in the world  forcing blizzard to add another 34 servers to cope with the influx. the online game turns the stand alone warcraft games into a persistent world that players can inhabit not just visit  europe s gamers could be waiting until january to hear when they can get their mitts on nintendo s handheld device  nintendo ds  says gamesindustry.biz. david yarnton  nintendo uk general manager  told a press conference to look out for details in the new year. its us launch was on sunday and it goes on sale in japan on 2 december. nintendo has a 95% share of the handheld gaming market and said it expected to sell around five million of the ds by march 2005.
telewest to challenge sky plus cable firm telewest is to offer a personal video recorder (pvr) in a set -top box to challenge sky plus.  sky plus is the market leader in the field of digital video recorders in the uk  with 474 000 subscribers. pvrs record tv programmes to a hard drive  letting viewers pause  and rewind live television and effectively  time shift  the viewing experience. a number of pvrs incorporating freeview digital terrestrial tv are also on the market but their success is limited. telewest s pvr will offer a 160gb hard drive  which has storage for up to 80 hours of programmes. the box has three tuners  which means viewers can record two channels simultaneously while watching a third channel.  sky plus boxes come in two versions - a 20gb version for £99 and a 160gb version for £399. sky also charges a £10 subscription fee to the service  unless viewers have a subscription to one of its premium packages. telewest has yet to reveal pricing for the new box or if it will be charging a subscription fee for the service.  eric tveter  president and chief operating officer at telewest broadband  said:  we will make our pvr set-top box available later this year  putting a stop to missed soaps  interrupted films and arguments over which programmes to record.  pvrs and recordable dvd players are set to replace video recorders as the standard method of recording and saving favourite tv programmes. last year  high street retailer dixons said it was going to stop selling vhs machines in favour of pvrs and recordable dvd machines. sky has said it aims to have 25% of its subscribers using sky plus by 2010 - it is predicting 10 million total subscribers by that date. it currently has 7.4 million subscribers  while telewest provides digital cable to 1.7 million customers.
dozens held over id fraud site twenty-eight people  including a briton  have been arrested after a global operation against a website allegedly involved in identity fraud.  those arrested are accused of operating shadowcrew.com  which investigators claim was a global clearing house for criminals involved in credit card fraud. a 19-year-old man from camberley  surrey  was arrested by the national hi-tech crime unit but has been bailed. operation firewall  led by the us secret service  involved seven nations. the british teenager was arrested on wednesday but details only emerged on friday. he has now been bailed to return to a surrey police station in december. all 28 people detained globally are suspected of being involved in an internet-based network which stole people s identities and used computers and websites to defraud credit card companies. the authorities in the us  who have indicted 19 people in newark  new jersey  estimate the fraud caused losses of more than $4m. assistant us attorney scott christie said several people had been arrested in argentina  bulgaria  canada  estonia  poland and sweden. mr christie said one of the ringleaders was believed to be a russian  anatoly tyukanov.  investigators from 30 law enforcement agencies worldwide spent 15 months looking into the activities of three websites - shadowcrew  carderplanet and darkprofits. the us secret service was first tipped off in july 2003. an nhtcu spokeswoman said the american investigators went undercover on the shadowcrew website and discovered some of the site s 4 000 members were using it for organised crime purposes.  she said criminals were using the websites to traffic counterfeit credit cards and false identification information and documents such as credit cards  driver s licences  passports and birth certificates. the websites shared tips on how to commit fraud and provided a forum by which people could buy the information and tools they needed to commit such crime  she said. the shadowcrew site  which has now been taken over by the us secret service  listed several discussion groups  in english and russian  including one on hacking  spam and online anonymity tools. the head of the nhtcu  acting detective chief superintendent  mick deats  said:  this investigation has resulted in the significant disruption of organised criminals using the internet for profit.   we believe that the suspects have trafficked at least 1.7 million stolen credit card numbers  leading to losses by financial institutions running into the millions.  chief supt deats went on to warn:  the internet offers huge legitimate benefits for modern society; however with it brings powerful opportunities for those seeking to abuse those benefits for criminal gain.  your identity is one of the most precious commodities. criminals who try to steal the personal and financial information of ordinary citizens as well as the confidential and proprietary information of companies engaged in e-commerce  will be targeted by law enforcement.
what high-definition will do to dvds first it was the humble home video  then it was the dvd  and now hollywood is preparing for the next revolution in home entertainment - high-definition.  high-definition gives incredible  3d-like pictures and surround sound. the dvd disks and the gear to play them will not be out for another year or so  and there at are still a number of issues to be sorted out. but when high-definition films do come out on the new format dvds  it will profoundly change home entertainment. for rick dean  director of business development for digital content company thx  a high-definition future is an exciting prospect. he has worked on the star wars dvd trilogy  finding nemo  the incredibles and indiana jones.  there was a time not so long ago when the film world and the video world were two completely separate worlds   he told the bbc news website.   the technology we are dealing with now means they are very much conjoined.  the film that we see in theatres is coming from the same digital file that we take the home video master   he says. but currently  putting a master feature film onto dvd requires severe compression because current dvd technology cannot hold as much as high-definition films demand.  as much as you compress the picture data rate wise  you also take qualities away from the picture that we fight so hard to keep in the master   he explains.  i would love to be able to show people what projects that we worked on really look like in the high-def world and i find it very exciting.   high-definition dvds can hold up to six times more data than the dvds we are used to. it will take time though to persuade people who spent money on dvd players to buy the different players and displays required to watch high-definition dvds in 18 months  time. mr dean is confident though:  i think if they see real hd [high-definition]  not some heavily compressed version of it  there is such a remarkable difference.  i have heard comments from people who say the images pop off the screen.   high-definition will mean some changes for those working behind the scenes too. on the whole  producing films for high-definition dvds will be easier in some ways because less compression is needed. equally  it may mean hollywood studios ask for more to be put onto the average dvd.  when we master movies right now  our data rates are running at about 1.2 gigabits per second   says mr dean.  our dvds that we put out today have to be squashed down to about five or six megabits per second.  that s a huge amount of compression that has to be applied - about 98%. so if you have anything that allows more space  you don t have to compress so hard.  studios could fit a lot more marketing material  games  and features  onto high-capacity dvds. currently  an entire dvd project can take up to three months  says mr dean. although the step of down-converting will be bypassed  this will realistically only save a day s work  says mr dean. one of the most time consuming elements is building dvd navigation and menu systems. on the fairly complex star wars disks  making sure the menu buttons worked took 45 human hours alone. if studios want to cash in on the extra space  it could mean extra human hours  for which someone has to pay.  if the decision on the studio side is that they are going to put a lot more on these disks  it could be more expensive because of all the extra navigation that is required.  and if studios do focus on delivering more  added value content   thinks mr dean  ultimately it could mean that they will want more money for it. those costs could filter down to the price ticket on a high-definition dvd. but if the consumer is not willing to pay a premium price  studios will listen  thinks mr dean.  high-definition throws up other challenge to film makers and dvd production alike. more clarity on screen means film makers have to make doubly sure that attention to detail is meticulous.  when we did the first hd version of star wars episode i  everybody was very sun-tanned  but that was make-up.  in the hd version of episode i  all these make-up lines showed up   explains mr dean. the restoration of the older star wars episodes revealed some interesting items too.   there are scans of a corridor [on the death star] and fairly plainly in one of those shots  there is a file cabinet stuck behind one of the doorways.  you never used to be able to see it because things are just blurred enough during the pan that you just didn t see it.  what high-definition revolution ultimately means is that the line between home entertainment and cinema worlds will blur. with home theatre systems turning living rooms into cinemas  this line blurs even further. it could also mean that how we get films  and in what format  will widen.  in the future we are going to look towards file delivery over ip [internet protocol - broadband]  giving a dvd-like experience from the set-top box to the hard drive   says mr dean. but that is some time off for most  and for now  people still like to show off something physical in their bookshelves.
us state acts to stop  spammers  us state texas has filed a lawsuit against two men believed to be among the world s top five spammers.  it is seeking millions of dollars in damages in a civil lawsuit filed earlier this week. the texas attorney general said it started the legal action as messages sent by the alleged spammers broke three laws governing e-mail marketing. the company named in the lawsuit denied any wrongdoing and said it complied with all relevant laws.  the texas lawsuit was filed against ryan samuel pitylak  a university oftexas student  and mark stephen trotter of california. both are thought to be the top executives in three companies - payperaction llc.  leadplex llc. and leadplex inc - that are suspected of sending out many millions of unwanted e-mail messages.  illegal spam must be stopped   said greg abbott  texas attorney general announcing the legal action.  spam is one of the most aggravating and pervasive problems facing consumers today.  the attorney general alleges that messages sent by mr pitylak and mr trotter s companies broke the 2003 controlling the assault of non-solicited pornography and marketing act (can-spam) as well as the texas electronic mail and solicitation act and texas deceptive trade practices act. all three acts confer cash penalties for each violation of their terms. if the men are found guilty and all penalties are applied  the two men could face a damages bill running into millions. mr abbott said the messages sent by the pair broke laws by using misleading subject lines  not identifying themselves as adverts and offering services for which they had no licence to do so in texas. lawyers for the alleged spammers said the lawsuit was groundless and the two men would defend themselves strongly against the accusations.  leadplex and payperaction are legitimate internet marketing companies that are in complete compliance with the federal can-spam act   said lin hughes  speaking on behalf of mr pitylak and mr trotter. in a similar move the us federal trade commission (ftc) has won a court order that stops an international group of spammers sending sexually explicit e-mail. the ftc took the action because the messages being sent violated several parts of the can-spam act. in particular  the pornographic messages did not identify themselves as being sexually explicit  had deceptive subject headings  did not have working opt-out mechanisms  failed to mention they were adverts and did not give the sender s real world address. the court order stops the spammers sending e-mail and freezes assets prior to a hearing on a permanent injunction.
gates opens biggest gadget fair bill gates has opened the consumer electronics show (ces) in las vegas  saying that gadgets are working together more to help people manage multimedia content around the home and on the move.  mr gates made no announcement about the next generation xbox games console  which many gadget lovers had been hoping for. about 120 000 people are expected to attend the trade show which stretches over more than 1.5 million square feet and runs from 6 to 9 january. the latest trends in digital imaging  storage technologies  thinner flat screen and high-definition tvs  wireless and portable technologies  gaming  and broadband technologies will all be on show over the three days.  mr gates said that a lot of work had been done in the last year to sort out usability and compatibility issues between devices to make it easier to share content.   we predicted at the beginning of the decade that the digital approach would be taken for granted - but there was a lot of work to do.  what is fun is to come to the show and see what has been done. it is going even faster than we expected and we are excited about it.  he highlighted technology trends over the last year that had driven the need to make technology and transferring content across difference devices  seamless .  gaming is becoming more of a social thing and all of the social genres will use this rich communications.  and if we look at what has been going on with e-mail  instant messaging  blogging  entertainment - if we can make this seamless  we can create something quite phenomenal.   mr gates said the pc  like microsoft s media centre  had a central role to play in how people would be making the most out of audio  video and images but it would not be the only device.  it is the way all these devices work together which will make the difference   he said. he also cited the success of the microsoft xbox video game halo 2  released in november  which pushed xbox console sales past playstation in the last two months of 2004 for the first time in 2004. the game  which makes use of the xbox live online games service  has sold 6.23 million copies since its release.  people are online and playing together and that really points to the future   he said. several partnerships with device and hardware manufacturers were highlighted during mr gates  speech  but there were few major groundbreaking new technology announcements. although most of these affected largely us consumers  the technologies highlighted the kind of trends to come. these included what mr gates called an  ecosystem of technologies   like sbc s iptv  a high-definition tv and digital video recorder that worked via broadband to give high-quality and fast tv. there were also other deals announced which meant that people could watch and control content over portable devices and mobile phones.  ces features several more key speeches from major technology players  such as intel and hewlett packard  as well as parallel conference sessions on gaming  storage  broadband and the future of digital music. about 50 000 new products will be unleashed at the tech-fest  which is the largest yet. consumer electronics and gadgets had a phenomenal year in 2004  according to figures released by ces organisers the cea on tuesday. the gadget explosion signalled the strongest growth yet in the us in 2004. that trend is predicted to continue with wholesale shipments of consumer technologies expected to grow by 11% again in 2005.
camera phones are  must-haves  four times more mobiles with cameras in them will be sold in europe by the end of 2004 than last year  says a report from analysts gartner.  globally  the number sold will reach 159 million  an increase of 104%. the report predicts that nearly 70% of all mobile phones sold will have a built-in camera by 2008. improving imaging technology in mobiles is making them an increasingly  must-have  buy. in europe  cameras on mobiles can take 1.3 megapixel images. but in japan and asia pacific  where camera phone technology is much more advanced  mobiles have already been released which can take 3.2 megapixel images. japan still dominates mobile phone technology  and the uptake there is huge. by 2008  according to gartner  95% of all mobiles sold there will have cameras on them.  camera phones had some teething problems when they were first launched as people struggled with poor quality images and uses for them  as well as the complexity and expense of sending them via mms (multimedia messaging services). this has changed in the last 18 months. handset makers have concentrated on trying to make phones easier to use. realising that people like to use their camera phones in different ways  they have introduced more design features  like rotating screens and viewfinders  removable memory cards and easier controls to send picture messages.  mobile companies have introduced more ways for people to share photos with other people. these have included giving people easier ways to publish them on websites  or mobile blogs - moblogs. but the report suggests that until image quality increases more  people will not be interested in printing out pictures at kiosks. image sensor technology inside cameras phones is improving. the gartner report suggests that by mid-2005  it is likely that the image resolution of most camera phones will be more than two megapixels. consumer digital cameras images range from two to four megapixels in quality  and up to six megapixels on a high-end camera. but a lot of work is being done to make camera phones more like digital cameras. some handsets already feature limited zoom capability  and manufacturers are looking into technological improvements that will let people take more photos in poorly-lit conditions  like nightclubs. other developments include wide-angle modes  basic editing features  and better sensors and processors for recording film clips.  images from camera phones have even made it into the art world. an exhibition next month in aid of the charity mencap  will feature snaps taken from the camera phones of top artists.  the exhibition  fonetography  will feature images taken by photographers david bailey  rankin and nan goldin  and artists sir peter blake  tracey emin and jack vettriano. but some uses for them have worried many organisations. intel  samsung  the uk s foreign office and lawrence livermore national laboratories in the us  have decided to ban camera phones from their buildings for fear of sensitive information being snapped and leaked. many schools  fitness centres and local councils have also banned them over fears about privacy and misuse. italy s information commissioner has also voiced concern and has issued guidelines on where and how the phones can be used. but camera phone fears have not dampened the manufacturers  profits. according to recent figures  sony ericsson s profits tripled in the third-quarter because of new camera phones. over 60% of mobiles sold during the three months through to september featured integrated cameras  it said.
text messages aid disaster recovery text messaging technology was a valuable communication tool in the aftermath of the tsunami disaster in asia.  the messages can get through even when the cell phone signal is too weak to sustain a spoken conversation. now some are studying how the technology behind sms could be better used during an emergency. sanjaya senanayake works for sri lankan television. the blogging world  though  might know him better by his online name  morquendi. he was one of the first on the scene after the tsunami destroyed much of the sri lankan coast. cell phone signals were weak. land lines were unreliable. so mr senanayake started sending out text messages. the messages were not just the latest news they were also an on-the-ground assessment of  who needs what and where . blogging friends in india took mr senanayake s text messages and posted them on a weblog called dogs without borders. thousands around the world followed the story that unfolded in the text messages that he sent.  and that s when mr senanayake started to wonder if sms might be put to more practical use.  sms networks can handle so much more traffic than the standard mobile phone call or the land line call   he says.   in every rural community  there s at least one person who has access to a mobile phone  or has a mobile phone  and can receive messages.  half a world away  in the caribbean nation of trinidad and tobago  taran rampersad read morquendi s messages. mr rampersad  who used to work in the military  knew how important on the ground communication can be in times of disaster. he wondered if there might be a way to automatically centralise text messages  and then redistribute them to agencies and people who might be able to help. mr rampersad said:  imagine if an aid worker in the field spotted a need for water purification tablets  and had a central place to send a text message to that effect.  he can message the server  so the server can send out an e-mail message and human or machine moderators can e-mail aid agencies and get it out in the field.  he added:  or  send it at the same time to other people who are using sms in the region  and they might have an excess of it  and be able to shift supplies to the right places.   mr rampersad and others had actually been thinking about such a system since hurricane ivan ravaged the caribbean and the southern united states last september. last week  he sent out e-mail messages asking for help in creating such a system for asia.  in only 72 hours  he found dan lane  a text message guru living in britain. the pair  along with a group of dedicated techies  are creating what they call the alert retrieval cache. the idea is to use open-source software - software can be used by anyone without commercial restraint - and a far-flung network of talent to create a system that links those in need with those who can help.  this is a classic smart mobs situation where you have people self-organizing into a larger enterprise to do things that benefit other people   says paul saffo  a director at the california-based institute for the future.  you may be halfway around the world from someone  but in cyberspace you re just one click or one e-mail away   he said   that s put a whole new dimension on disaster relief and recovery  where often people halfway around the world can be more effective in making something happen precisely because they re not right on top of the tragedy.  it is still very early days for the project  though. in an e-mail  dan lane calls it  an early proof of concept.  right now  the alert retrieval cache can only take a text message and automatically upload it to a web-page  or distribute it to an e-mail list. in the near future  the group says it hopes to take in messages from people in affected areas  and use human moderators to take actions based on the content of those messages. but there s still another challenge. you have to get people to know that the system is there for them to use.  it s amazing how difficult it is to find someone to pass it along to  and say  look this is what we re trying to do and everything like that   says mr rampersad.  so the big problem right now is the same problem we re trying to solve - human communication.  he is optimistic  however. he thinks that the alert retrieval cache is an idea whose time has come and he hopes governments  too  will sit up and take notice. and he stands by his motto  courtesy of michelangelo: criticise by creating.  clark boyd is technology correspondent for the world  a bbc world service and wgbh-boston co-production.
2d metal slug offers retro fun like some drill sergeant from the past  metal slug 3 is a wake-up call to today s gamers molly-coddled with slick visuals and fancy trimmings.  with its hand-animated sprites and 2d side-scrolling  this was even considered retro when released in arcades four years ago. but a more frantic shooter you will not find at the end of your joypad this year. and yes  that includes halo 2. simply choose your grunt and wade through five 2d side-scrolling levels of the most hectic video game blasting you will ever encounter. it is also the toughest game you are likely to play  as hordes of enemies and few lives pile the pressure on.  players must battle soldiers  snowmen  zombies  giant crabs and aliens  not to mention the huge  screen-filling bosses that guard each of the five levels.  the shoot-anything-that-moves gameplay is peppered with moments of old-school genius. fans of robotic gastropods should note the title refers  instead  to the vast array of vehicles on offer in a game stuffed with bizarre hardware. tanks  jets and submarines can be commandeered  as well as cannon-toting camels  elephants and ostriches - more weaponry on offer than in an acre of iraq. doling out justice is a joy thanks to ultra responsive controls  and while this is a tough nut to crack  it is addictive enough to have you gagging for that one last go. and at a mere £20  metal slug 3 is as cheap as sliced  fried spuds  as the man says. of course  most of you will ignore this  lacking as it does the visual fireworks of modern blasters. but at a time when blockbuster titles offer only a fresh lick of paint in favour of real innovation  metal slug 3 is a fresh gasp of air from an era when the xbox was not even a twinkle in bill gates  eye.
security warning over  fbi virus  the us federal bureau of investigation is warning that a computer virus is being spread via e-mails that purport to be from the fbi.  the e-mails show that they have come from an fbi.gov address and tell recipients that they have accessed illegal websites. the messages warn that their internet use has been monitored by the fbi s internet fraud complaint center. an attachment in the e-mail contains the virus  the fbi said. the message asks recipients to click on the attachment and answer some questions about their internet use. but rather than being a questionnaire  the attachment contains a virus that infects the recipient s computer  according to the agency. it is not clear what the virus does once it has infected a computer. users are warned never to open attachment from unsolicited e-mails or from people they do not know.   recipients of this or similar solicitations should know that the fbi does not engage in the practice of sending unsolicited e-mails to the public in this manner   the fbi said in a statement. the bureau is investigating the phoney e-mails. the agency earlier this month shut down fbi.gov accounts  used to communicate with the public  because of a security breach. a spokeswoman said the two incidents appear to be unrelated.
europe backs digital tv lifestyle how people receive their digital entertainment in the future could change  following the launch of an ambitious european project.  in nice last week  the european commission announced its networked & electronic media (nem) initiative. its broad scope stretches from the way media is created  through each of the stages of its distribution  to its playback. the commission wants people to be able to locate the content they desire and have it delivered seamlessly  when on the move  at home or at work  no matter who supplies the devices  network  content  or content protection scheme. more than 120 experts were in nice to share the vision of interconnected future and hear pledges of support from companies such as nokia  intel  philips  alcatel  france telecom  thomson and telefonica. it might initially appear to be surprising that companies in direct competition are keen to work together. but again and again  speakers stated they could not see incompatible  stand-alone solutions working. a long-term strategy for the evolution and convergence of technologies and services would be required.  the european commission is being pragmatic in its approach. they have identified that many groups have defined the forms of digital media in the areas that nem encompasses. the nem approach is to take a serious look at what is available and what is in the pipeline  pick out the best  bring them together and identify where the gaps are. where it finds holes  it will develop standards to fill them. what is significant is that such a large and powerful organisation has stated its desire for digital formats to be open to all and work on any gadget. this is bound to please  if not surprise  many individuals and user organisations who feel that the wishes of the holder of rights to content are normally considered over and above those of the consumer. many feel that the most difficult and challenging area for the commission will be to identify a solution for different digital rights management (drm) schemes. currently drm solutions are incompatible  locking certain types of purchased content  making them unplayable on all platforms. with the potential of having a percentage of every media transaction that takes place globally  the prize for being the supplier of the world s dominant drm scheme is huge. although entertainment is an obvious first step  it will encompass the remote provisions of healthcare  energy efficiency and control of the smart home. the 10-year plan brings together the work of many currently running research projects that the ec has been funding for a number of years.  simon perry is the editor of the digital lifestyles website  which covers the impact of technology on media
rivals of the £400 apple... the mac mini is the cheapest apple computer ever. but though it is cheap for a mac how does it compare to pcs that cost about the same amount  dot.life tries to find out if you can you get more for your money if you stick with the beige box.      an extremely small computer that is designed to bring the macintosh to the masses.  apple offer a less powerful mac mini for £339 but the £399 models has a 1.4ghz power pc chip  80 gigabyte hard drive  combined cd burner/dvd player. it comes equipped with usb and firewire ports for peripheral connections  ethernet port for broadband  a port for standard video output and an audio/headphone jack.the machine comes with mac os x  the apple operating system  the software suite ilife  which includes itunes  iphoto  imovie  idvd and garageband.  a monitor  keyboard or mouse. there is also no built-in support for wireless technology or any speakers. the lack of a dvd burner is an omission in the age of backing-up important software. wireless and a dvd burner can be added at extra cost.  apple are targeting people who already have a main computer and want to upgrade - especially pc users who have used an apple ipod.  compact and stylish  the mac mini would not look out of place in any home. apple computers are famously user friendly and offer much better network security  which means fewer viruses. the package of software that comes with the machine is the best money can buy.  the mac mini is just a box. if you don t already have a monitor etc  adding them to the package sees the value for money begin to dwindle. macs don t offer the upgrade flexibility of a pc and the machine s specifications lack the horse power for tasks such as high-end video editing or games.   the mac mini puts the macintosh within the reach of everyone   an apple spokesman said.  it will bring more customers to the platform  especially pc users and owners.     an entry-level machine designed for basic home use.  a 2.6ghz intel celeron chip  40 gigabyte hard drive  256mb  combined cd burner/dvd player. it comes equipped with a 17 inch monitor  keyboard and mouse. the machine has 6 usb ports and an ethernet port for broadband connection. there s also a port for standard video output. the machine comes with windows xp home edition. it provides basic home tools such as a media player and word processor.  a dvd burner  or any wireless components built in. wireless and a dvd burner can be added at extra cost.  homes and small offices  including those looking to add a low cost second computer.  cost is the clear advantage. the dell provides enough power and software for basic gaming and internet surfing. it s easily upgradeable so a bigger hard drive  better sound and graphics cards can be added.  the dell is hardly stylish and the hard drive is on the small size for anyone wanting to store photos or a decent sized digital music collection.   this machine is for small businesses and for people who want a second computer for basic home use  perhaps in a kids bedroom   a spokesman for dell said.  i think we offer better value once you realise all the extras needed for the mac mini.     a desktop computer that pc pro magazine dubbed best performer in a group test of machines that cost only £399 (£469 including vat).  a good basic pc that  according to pc pro  has  superb upgrade potential . for your money you get a 1.8ghz amd sempron processor  512mb of ram  120gb hard drive  dvd writer  16-inch monitor  mouse  keyboard and windows xp2  much more than the basics. it cannot handle 3d graphics and has no firewire slots.  those on a limited budget who want a machine they can add to and improve as their cash allows.  it s cheap and has plenty of room to improve but that could end up making it expensive in the long run. it s a good basic workhorse.  it s not pretty and has a monitor rather than a flat-panel display. some of the upgrades offered by jal to the basic model are pricey. you might find that you want to chop and change quite quickly.  nick ross  deputy labs editor at pc pro  said the important point about buying a cheap and cheerful pc is the upgrade path. interest has switched from processor power to graphics and sound cards as that s what makes the difference in games.  even manufacturers are not going to be marketing machines as faster   he said   they ll emphasise the different features.     a computer built from bits you buy and put together yourself.  a surprisingly good pc sporting an amd athlon xp 2500 processor  512 megabytes ram  a graphics card with 128 ram on board plus tv out  a 40 gb hard drive  cd-writer and dvd player  windows xp home.  anything else. you re building it so you have to buy all the software you want to install and do your own trouble-shooting and tech support. building your own machine is easier than it used to be but you need to read specifications carefully to make sure all parts work together.  experienced and keen pc users. building your own pc  or upgrading the one you have  is a great way to improve your understanding of how it all works.  it s cheap  you can specify exactly what you want and you get the thrill of putting it together yourself. and a bigger thrill if everything works as it should.  once it s built you won t be able to do much with it until you start buying software for it. if it starts to go wrong it might take a lot of fixing. as gavin cox of the excellent buildyourown.org.uk website put it:  it will be tough to obtain/build a pc to ever be as compact and charming as the mac mini.    performance-wise  it s not  cutting edge  and is barely entry-level by today s market  but up against the mac mini  i believe it will hold its own and even pull a few more tricks   says gavin cox. the good news is that the machine is eminently expandable. by contrast  says mr cox  the mac mini is almost disposable.
apple laptop is  greatest gadget  the apple powerbook 100 has been chosen as the greatest gadget of all time  by us magazine mobile pc.  the 1991 laptop was chosen because it was one of the first  lightweight  portable computers and helped define the layout of all future notebook pcs. the magazine has compiled an all-time top 100 list of gadgets  which includes the sony walkman at number three and the 1956 zenith remote control at two. gadgets needed moving parts and/or electronics to warrant inclusion. the magazine staff compiled the list and specified that gadgets also needed to be a  self-contained apparatus that can be used on its own  not a subset of another device .   in general we included only items that were potentially mobile   said the magazine.   in the end  we tried to get to the heart of what really makes a gadget a gadget   it concluded. the oldest  gadget  in the top 100 is the abacus  which the magazine dates at 190 a.d.  and put in 60th place. other pre-electronic gadgets in the top 100 include the sextant from 1731 (59th position)  the marine chronometer from 1761 (42nd position) and the kodak brownie camera from 1900 (28th position). the tivo personal video recorder is the newest device to make the top 10  which also includes the first flash mp3 player (diamond multimedia)  as well as the first  successful  digital camera (casio qv-10) and mobile phone (motorola startac). the most popular gadget of the moment  the apple ipod  is at number 12 in the list while the first sony transistor radio is at number 13.  sony s third entry in the top 20 is the cdp-101 cd player from 1983.  who can forget the crystalline  hiss-free blast of madonna s like a virgin emanating from their first cd player   asked the magazine. karl elsener s knife  the swiss army knife from 1891  is at number 20 in the list. gadgets which could be said to feature surprisingly low down in the list include the original telephone (23rd)  the nintendo gameboy (25th)  and the pulsar quartz digital watch (36th). the list also contains plenty of oddities: the pez sweet dispenser (98th)  1990s toy tamagotchi (86th) and the bizarre ronco inside the shell egg scrambler (84th).  almost everyone has a mobile phone  how many people own a powerbook  or an ipod  the findings of this magazine are not very convincing.  what about the magnetic compass  we still use it 1 000 years after it was invented.  i am amazed by the obsession with individual gadgets rather than genre. for example the sony walkman was the first truly portable way of listening to your own music on the move whereas minidisc  flash mp3  portable cd players etc. are really just improvements in technology.  my favourite  true  gadgets are probably my portable minidisc player and the little battery powered whizzy thing i use to froth up my coffee!  calm down it s only in their opinion  and any list that includes the taser in the top 100 gadgets has to be suspect....  swiss army knife and no question about it. how many of the other items are still relatively unchanged from the original idea and still as useful/popular  you don t need a laptop or even a pocket calculator to work that one out!  this list merely illustrates interesting cultural divides between the american authors and the overwhelmingly british responses. brits see no further than mobile phones and the over thirties sinclair; whilst the americans focus on apple  tv remotes and tivo (which probably is rather obscure in europe).  what about the soda stream. this gadget changed my pre-teen life. lap tops may enable you to  think different  but you cant use them to  get busy with the fizzy   how about astro wars  one of the pioneers for computer games  i remember spending many an hour playing this and it still works today! however tried it the other day and it was rubbish  still a great gadget of its time.  why worry about mobile phones. soon they will be subsumed into the pda s / laptops etc.  what about the marine chronometer  completely revolutionised navigation for boats and was in use for centuries. for it s time  a technological marvel!  sony net minidisc! it paved the way for more mp3 player to explode onto the market. i always used my netmd  and could not go anywhere without it.  a laptop computer is not a gadget! it s a working tool!  the sinclair executive was the world s first pocket calculator. i think this should be there as well.  how about the clockwork radio  or gps  or a pocket calculator  all these things are useful to real people  not just pc magazine editors.  are the people who created this list insane   surely the most important gadget of the modern age is the mobile phone  it has revolutionised communication  which is more than can be said for a niche market laptop. from outside the modern age  the marine chronometer is the single most important gadget  without which modern transportation systems would not have evolved so quickly.  has everyone forgot about the breville pie maker    an interesting list. of the electronic gadgets  thousands of journalists in the early 1980s blessed the original noteboook pc - the tandy 100. the size of a4 paper and light  three weeks on a set of batteries  an excellent keyboard  a modem. a pity tandy did not make it dos compatible.  what s an apple powerbook 100   it s out of date - not much of a  gadget . surely it has to be something simple / timeless - the tin opener  swiss army knife  safety razor blade  wristwatch or the thing for taking stones out of horses hooves    it has to be the mobile phone. no other single device has had such an effect on our way of living in such a short space of time.  the ball point pen has got to be one of the most used and common gadgets ever. also many might be grateful for the pocket calculator which was a great improvement over the slide rule.  the casio pocket calculator that played a simple game and made tinny noises was also a hot gadget in 1980. a true gadget  it could be carried around and shown off.  all top 10 are electronic toys  so the list is probably a better reflection of the current high-tech obsession than anything else. i say this as the swiss army knife only made no 20.  sinclair ql a machine far ahead of its time. the first home machine with a true multi-takings os. shame the marketing was so bad!!!  apple.. a triumph of fashion over... well everything else.  utter rubbish. yes  the apple laptop and sony walkman are classic gadgets. but to call the sextant and the marine chronometer  gadgets  and rank them as less important than a tv remote control reveals a quite shocking lack of historical perspective. the former literally helped change the world by vastly improving navigation at see. the latter is the seed around which the couch potato culture has developed. no competition.  i d also put apple s newton and the first palm pilot there as the front runners for portable computing  and possibly the toshiba libretto for the same reason. i only wish that vulcan inc s flipstart wasn t just vapourware otherwise it would be at the top.  how did a laptop ever manage to beat off the challenge of the wristwatch or the telephone (mobile or otherwise)  what about radios and tvs   the swiss army knife. by far the most useful gadget. i got mine 12 years ago. still wearing and using it a lot! it stood the test of time.  psion organiser series 3  should be up there. had a usable qwerty keyboard  removable storage  good set of apps and programmable. case design was good (batteries in the hinge - a first  i think). great product innovation.  the first mobile pc was voted best gadget by readers of...err... mobile pc ! why do you keep putting these obviously biased lists on your site  it s obviously the mobile phone or remote control  and readers of a less partisan publication would tell you that.  the motorola startac should be number one. why  there will be mobile phones long after notebook computers and other gadgets are either gone or integrated in communications devices.  the psion series 3c! the first most practical way to carry all your info around...  i too would back the sinclair spectrum - without this little beauty i would never have moved into the world of it and earn the living that i do now.  i d have put the mobile phone high up the list. probably a nokia model.  sinclair spectrum - 16k. it plugged into the tv. games were rubbish but it gave me a taste for programming and that s what i do for a living now.  i wish more modern notebooks -- even apple s newest offerings -- were more like the pb100. particularly disheartening is the demise of the trackball  which has given way to the largely useless  trackpad  which every notebook on the market today uses. they re invariably inaccurate  uncomfortable  and cumbersome to use.  congratulations to apple  a deserved win!
smart search lets art fans browse if you don t know art but know what you like  new search technology could prove a useful gateway to painting.  artgarden  developed by bt s research unit  is being tested by the tate as a new way of browsing its online collection of paintings. rather than search by the name of an artist or painting  users are shown a selection of pictures. clicking on their favourite will change the gallery in front of them to a selection of similar works.  the technology uses a system dubbed smart serendipity  which is a combination of artificial intelligence and random selection. it  chooses  a selection of pictures  by scoring paintings based on a selection of keywords associated with them. so  for instance a whistler painting of a bridge may have the obvious keywords such as bridge and whistler associated to it but will also widen the search net with terms such as aesthetic movement  19th century and water. a variety of paintings will then be shown to the user  based partly on the keywords and partly on luck.  it is much more akin to wandering through the gallery   said jemima rellie  head of the tate s digital programme. for richard tateson  who worked on the artgarden project  the need for a new way to search grew out of personal frustration.  i went to an online clothes store to find something to buy my wife for christmas but i didn t have a clue what i wanted   he said. the text-based search was restricted to looking either by type of garment or designer  neither of which he found helpful. he ended up doing his present shopping on the high street instead.  he thinks the dominance of text-based searching is not necessarily appealing to the majority of online shoppers. similarly  with art  browsing is often more important than finding a particular object.  you don t arrive at tate britain and tell people what you want to see. one of the skills of showing off the collection is to introduce people to things they wouldn t have asked for   he said. the tate is committed to making its art more accessible and technology such as artgarden can help with that  said ms rellie. she hopes the technology can be incorporated on to the website in the near future. bt research is looking at extending the technology to other searching  such as for music and films.
uk gets official virus alert site a rapid alerting service that tells home computer users about serious internet security problems is being launched by the uk government.  the service  it safe  will issue warnings about damaging viruses  software vulnerabilities and weaknesses on devices such as mobile phones. alerts tell people how the threats affect them and what they can do to avoid trouble and protect themselves. the service will be free and those who sign up can get e-mail or text alerts. the scheme is aimed at home users and small businesses. the government estimates it will issue security alerts about six to 10 times a year  based on previous experience of virus outbreaks.  there is a clear need for easy-to-understand and simple independent advice for non-technically minded people who use computers either at home or at work   said home office minister hazel blears.  the purpose of this new government service is to ensure computer users are aware of the risks involved and how to deal with them easily and effectively without causing alarm.  those signing up will only be told about the most serious security threats that have the potential to affect millions of people.  full-time staff are being employed to comb through the many hundreds of alerts issued each year by computer security firms to spot which ones have the potential to catch out a large number of people between alerts the service will occasionally send messages giving people advice about safe ways to use their computers and phones.  it safe will take our technical expertise and use it to help home users understand the risks and keep their computer systems  mobile phones and a range of related consumer electronic items  safe   said roger cumming  director of the national infrastructure security coordination centre (niscc).  the niscc  which is running the service  also stressed that those signing up would still need to use anti-virus software  firewalls  and software updates to stay secure. warnings about security problems will tell people what the problem is  how it affects them and what they can do to avoid trouble. alerts will not be issued unless users can do something to protect themselves against the threat. this might include downloading an update from an anti-virus vendor or updating software to close loopholes and fix vulnerabilities. however no software patches or programs will actually be dispensed through the site. the alerts will tell people how to go about getting hold of patches from security firms. the niscc spokesman said the site and alerting service would stay in existence for as long as there were security bugs on home computers and other gadgets.  government statistics show that more than half of all uk households own a home computer. it was estimated that almost 13 million of these were able to access the internet in 2004. the launch comes as the number of viruses and other malicious programs in existence is reaching unprecedented numbers. in september 2004  the number of malicious programs circulating topped the 100 000 mark. some fear that this figure could hit 150 000 by september 2005. the creation of the national alert service follows similar efforts in the netherlands and us. the national alerting service for the netherlands (aka de waarschuwingsdienst) and the us national cyber alerting service also tell citizens of serious security threats.
learning to love broadband we are reaching the point where broadband is a central part of daily life  at least for some  argues technology analyst bill thompson.  one of the nice things about being a writer is that i rarely have to go to an office to work. i can sit in a caf&#233; or a library  with or without a wi-fi connection  and research and write articles. if i am passing through kings cross station on my way to a meeting then i can log on from the platform. and i can spend the day working with my girlfriend anne  a children s writer  at her house in cambridge  sharing her wireless network. but just over a week ago i arrived at her house to find that there was no network connection.  we checked the cable modem and noticed that it had no power  and when she changed the power lead it sparked at her in a way which made it abundantly clear that it was never going to talk to the internet again. she called her service provider  and they told her it would be five days before an engineer would show up with a new cable modem. this did not seem too bad  but in fact she really suffered until her connection was restored on wednesday. with no modem installed in her computer  she had to borrow internet access from friends or use the dial-up connection on her daughter s laptop  so she had to choose between copying her files onto her usb memory card or accepting a slower and flakier net connection. as a result she did not submit the pictures she wanted to use for a book on earthquakes because they were too big to send over dial-up.  she could not research other material because she is used to having easy access to a fast link that lets her search quickly and effectively. but the impact spread into her personal life too. she did not take her children to the cinema during half-term because she could not find out which films were showing at the local cinemas. she planned a trip to norfolk but did not check the weather because the only place she knows to look for weather information is the bbc website. and she did not know where to go fossil-hunting on the trip because she could not type  fossils norfolk  into google. of course  she readily admits  she could have answered these questions if she had looked in the local paper  listened to the radio or found a book on fossils. but she did not  because having fast  always on  and easy access to the net has become part of the routine of her daily life  and when it was taken away it was too much effort to go back to the old ways of doing things. she may be unusual  but i do not think anne is alone.  according to ofcom there were almost four million broadband users in the uk in april 2004  and numbers are climbing fast. there will certainly be five million by the end of the year. dial-up users are switching to broadband. my dad finally made the change earlier this month and new net users are selecting broadband from the start. more and more of these broadband users are beginning to mould their daily lives around the availability of broadband internet connections  and they too will find it difficult to cope if they cannot get online for any reason.  it is part of the process of adaptation  and it is a vital step in the growth of broadband in the uk and elsewhere. people who have integrated net access into their daily lives tell their friends about it  and show off the cool stuff they can do. they encourage other people to get broadband so that they can share digital photos and do all of the other things that need fast and reliable connectivity. of course  broadband in the uk is laughably slow compared to other parts of the world. in south korea  japan and hong kong normal connection speeds are measured in megabits  or millions of bits  a second rather than the thousands that we are supposed to be happy with. but speed is only a small part of the attraction of broadband  and when it comes to checking websites for film times  looking at weather forecasts  or all of the other small things that make a real difference to the routines and habits of our daily lives  even uk speeds are sufficient. it may not be the brave new world of streaming full-screen video and superfast file downloads  but it will do for now. and it is certainly better than slow access or no access. just ask anne.  bill thompson is a regular commentator on the bbc world service programme go digital.
broadband fuels online expression fast web access is encouraging more people to express themselves online  research suggests.  a quarter of broadband users in britain regularly upload content and have personal sites  according to a report by uk think-tank demos. it said that having an always-on  fast connection is changing the way people use the internet. more than five million households in the uk have broadband and that number is growing fast.  the demos report looked at the impact of broadband on people s net habits. it found that more than half of those with broadband logged on to the web before breakfast. one in five even admitted to getting up in the middle of the night to browse the web.  more significantly  argues the report  broadband is encouraging people to take a more active role online. it found that one in five post something on the net everyday  ranging from comments or opinions on sites to uploading photographs.  broadband is putting the  me  in media as it shifts power from institutions and into the hands of the individual   said john craig  co-author of the demos report.  from self-diagnosis to online education  broadband creates social innovation that moves the debate beyond simple questions of access and speed.  the demos report  entitled broadband britain: the end of asymmetry   was commissioned by net provider aol.  broadband is moving the perception of the internet as a piece of technology to an integral part of home life in the uk   said karen thomson  chief executive of aol uk   with many people spending time on their computers as automatically as they might switch on the television or radio.  according to analysts nielsen//netratings  more than 50% of the 22.8 million uk net users regularly accessing the web from home each month are logging on at high speed they spend twice as long online than people on dial-up connections  viewing an average of 1 444 pages per month. the popularity of fast net access is growing  partly fuelled by fierce competition over prices and services.
the year search became personal the odds are that when you fire up your browser  you go straight to your favourite search engine  rather than type in a web address.  some may see this as the height of laziness  but in an era of information overload  search has become a vital tool in navigating the net. it is symptomatic of how the way we use the internet is changing. and as google has shown  there is money in offering a service that people cannot live without. there is no shortage of companies vying for the loyalty of web searchers  offering a wealth of different services and tools to help you find what you want. over the past 12 months  giants of the technology world such as microsoft and yahoo have sought to grab a slice of the search action.  user experience has contributed to people searching more   said yonca brunini of yahoo. as people become more familiar with the internet  they tend to spend more time online and ask more queries  she said.  the other second thing is broadband   ms brunini told the bbc news website.  this will do to internet what colour has done to tv.   but search is hardly a new phenomenon. it has been around since the early days of the net.  veteran surfers will remember old-timers like hotbot and altavista.  search was always important   said urs holzle  google vice-president of operations.  we trumpeted that in 1999. it is even truer now as there are more users and more information.   people didn t realise that search was the future. the financials have something to do with it.  google has shown web commerce can work through its targeted small adverts  which appear at the top and down the right-hand side of a page and are related to the original search. these small ads helped google reach revenues of $805.9m for the three months to september. others have woken up to the fact that you can make money out of web queries.  once you see there is a market  microsoft is bound to step to it. if microsoft sees search as important  then nobody queries it   said mr holzle.  microsoft is just one of the net giants muscling in on search. yahoo  ask jeeves  amazon and a handful of smaller outfits are all seeking to capture eyeballs.  web users face a plethora of choices as each company tries to outflank google by rolling out new search products such as desktop search. it reflects how the battlefield has shifted from the net to your pc. search is not just about finding your way around the web. it is now about unlocking information hidden in the gigabytes of documents  images and music on hard drives. for all these advances  search is still a clumsy tool  often failing to come up with exactly what you had in mind. in order to do a better job  search engines are trying to get to know you better  doing a better job of remembering  cataloguing and managing all the information you come across.  personalisation is going to be a big area for the future   said yahoo s yonca brunini.  whoever cracks that and gives you the information you want is going to be the winner. we have to understand you to give you better results that are tailored to you.  this is perhaps the holy grail of search  understanding what it is you are looking for and providing it quickly. the problem is that no one yet knows how to get there.
france starts digital terrestrial france has become the last big european country to launch a digital terrestrial tv (dtt) service.  initially  more than a third of the population will be able to receive 14 free-to-air channels. despite the long wait for a french dtt roll-out  the new platform s backers hope to emulate the success of its uk free-to-air counterpart  freeview. recent figures from the uk s regulator ofcom showed freeview was more popular than the sky digital satellite service. in the three months to september 2004  almost five times as many people signed up to the uk s free-to-air dtt service compared with sky. almost 60% of uk households have gone digital on at least one television set through cable  satellite or freeview.  the french dtt platform is known as tnt  which stands for tv numerique terrestre or digital terrestrial television. but it is being branded as television numerique pour tous  or  digital television for all . tnt is a joint venture between public broadcaster france televisions and a handful of cable and satellite operators. digital terrestrial tv will launch as a free-to-air platform to start with  adding pay-tv channels later. thirty-five contenders have bid for an additional eight frequencies on top of the 14 already allocated.  a couple of years ago  dtt had a bad image   said olivier gerolami  chief operating officer of tnt.   but everyone s impressed with dtt in the uk  italy and germany  and they realise it is a very good idea.  france is the poorest market in europe in terms of free-to-air national channels  so it has the potential to be one of the biggest dtt markets   mr gerolami added in remarks quoted by the us entertainment industry paper variety. tnt aims to reach 35% of france s population at launch  from 17 transmission sites. the transmission area will initially include paris  lille  lyon and toulouse. eventually there will be 115 sites reaching over 80% of homes. digital terrestrial set-top boxes are available from as little as 70 euros (£50). a recent survey by mediametrie found that 70% of people interviewed were aware of dtt  and 25% were planning to buy a digital receiver. consumer electronics companies such as nokia  sagem  sony and thomson are gearing up for production. the conseil superieur de l audiovisuel (csa)  the french broadcasting regulator  said:  following the recent success of freeview in the uk  some manufacturers are optimistic about sales prospects . media analysts believe that initially the majority of viewers will buy inexpensive set-top boxes that are unable to support interactive services. the csa said the current aim of reaching 85% of the population by 2007 was achievable  but the future of the remaining tv viewers required action by the public sector. for the most part  they are people living in mountainous or border areas  which will remain beyond the reach of digital terrestrial tv for years.  up to 15 pay-tv channels will launch on dtt between september 2005 and march 2006. leading pay-tv operators canal plus and tps have submitted bids to market bouquets of channels. free-to-air services will be broadcast in mpeg-2 format. but pay-tv operators will be allowed to broadcast in mpeg-4 - a much better compression technology - which will potentially allow for high-definition (hd) subscription services in the future. tnt expects between 700 000 and one million dtt set-top boxes to be sold in 2005.  it is difficult to tell how quickly it will take off   said mr gerolami   but we re optimistic that it will revolutionise television in france.  other analysts were less optimistic  predicting consumers would now be less likely to sign up for pay-tv subscriptions.  we think free dtt could put brakes on the underlying growth of pay-tv in france   said henri de bodinat  vice-president of the arthur d. little consultancy.
format wars could  confuse users  technology firms sony  philips  matsushita and samsung are developing a common way to stop people pirating digital music and video.  the firms want to make a system that ensures files play on the hardware they make but also thwarts illegal copying. the move could mean more confusion for consumers already faced by many different  and conflicting  content control systems  experts warned. they say there are no guarantees the system will even prevent piracy.  currently many online stores wrap up downloadable files in an own-brand control system that means they can only be played on a small number of media players. systems that limit what people can do with the files they download are known as digital rights management systems. by setting up the alliance to work on a common control system  the firms said they hope to end this current fragmentation of file formats. in a joint statement the firms said they wanted to let consumers enjoy  appropriately licensed video and music on any device  independent of how they originally obtained that content . the firms hope that it will also make it harder for consumers to make illegal copies of the music  movies and other digital content they have bought. called the marlin joint development association  the alliance will define basic specifications that every device made by the electronics firms will conform to. marlin will be built on technology from rights management firm intertrust as well as an earlier drm system developed by a group known as the coral consortium.  the move is widely seen as a way for the four firms to decide their own destiny on content control systems instead of having to sign up for those being pushed by apple and microsoft. confusingly for consumers  the technology that comes out of the alliance will sit alongside the content control systems of rival firms such as microsoft and apple.  in many ways the different drm systems are akin to the different physical formats  such as betamax and vhs  that consumers have seen in the past   said ian fogg  personal technology and broadband analyst at jupiter research.  the difference is that it is very fragmented   he said.  it s not a two-horse race  it s a five  six  seven or even eight-horse race  mr fogg said consumers had to be very careful when buying digital content to ensure that it would play on the devices they own. he said currently there were even incompatibilities within drm families. although initiatives such as microsoft s  plays for sure  program could help remove some of the uncertainty  he said  life was likely to be confusing for consumers for some time to come.  shelley taylor  analyst and author of a report about online music services  said the locks and limits on digital files were done to maximise the cash that firms can make from consumers. apple s itunes service was a perfect example of this  she said.  although itunes has been hugely successful  apple could not justify its existence if it did not help sell all those ipods   she said.  she said rampant competition between online music services  of which there are now 230 according to recent figures  could drive more openness and freer file formats.  it always works out that consumer needs win out in the long run   she said   and the services that win in the long run are the ones that listen to consumers earliest.  ms taylor said the limits legal download services place on files could help explain the continuing popularity of file-sharing systems that let people get hold of pirated pop.  people want portability   she said   and with peer-to-peer they have 100% portability.  cory doctorow  european co-ordinator for the electronic frontier foundation which campaigns for consumers on many cyber-rights issues  expressed doubts that the marlin system would achieve its aims.  not one of these systems has ever prevented piracy or illegal copying   he said. he said many firms readily admit that their drm systems are little protection against skilled attackers such as the organised crime gangs that are responsible for most piracy. instead  said mr doctorow  drm systems were intended to control the group that electronics firms have most hold over - consumers.  the studios and labels perceive an opportunity to sell you your media again and again - the ipod version  the auto version  the american and uk version  the ringtone version  and so on.
reboot ordered for eu patent law a european parliament committee has ordered a rewrite of the proposals for controversial new european union rules which govern computer-based inventions.  the legal affairs committee (juri) said the commission should re-submit the computer implemented inventions directive after meps failed to back it. it has had vocal critics who say it could favour large over small firms and impact open-source software innovation. supporters say it would let firms protect their inventions. the directive is intended to offer patent protection to inventions that use software to achieve their effect  in other words   computer implemented invention . the draft law suffered setbacks when poland  one of the largest eu member states  rejected its adoption twice in two months. intense lobbying on the issue has started to gain momentum in some national parliaments putting them under immense pressure. only two meps backed the draft law at the juri meeting  with one voting to abstain.  opponents of the draft directive welcomed the decision and said a new first reading of the proposals would give the eu a chance to have fuller debates about its implications in all member states. in the us  the patenting of computer programs and internet business methods is permitted. this means that the us-based amazon.com holds a patent for its  one-click shopping  service  for example. critics are concerned that the directive could lead to a similar model happening in europe. this  they fear  could hurt small software developers because they do not have the legal and financial might of larger companies if they had to fight patent legal action in court. supporters say current laws are inefficient and it would serve to even up a playing field without bringing eu laws in line with the us.
sun offers processing by the hour sun microsystems has launched a pay-as-you-go service which will allow customers requiring huge computing power to rent it by the hour.  sun grid costs users $1 (53p) for an hour s worth of processing and storage power on systems maintained by sun. so-called grid computing is the latest buzz phrase in a company which believes that computing capacity is as important a commodity as hardware and software. sun likened grid computing to the development of electricity.  the system could mature in the same way utilities such as electricity and water have developed  said sun s chief operating officer jonathan schwartz.  why build your own grid when you can use ours for a buck an hour   he asked in a webcast launching sun s quarterly network computing event in california. the company will have to persuade data centre managers to adopt a new model but it said it already had interest from customers in the oil  gas and financial services industries.  some of them want to book computing capacity of more than 5 000 processors each  sun said. mr schwartz ran a demonstration of the service  showing how data could be processed in a protein folding experiment. hundreds of servers were used simultaneously  working on the problem for a few seconds each.  although it only took a few seconds  the experiment cost $12 (£6.30) because it had used up 12 hour s worth of computing power. the sun grid relies on solaris  the operating system owned by sun. initially it will house the grid in existing premises and will use idle servers to test software before shipping it to customers. it has not said how much the system will cost to develop but it already has a rival in ibm  which argues that its capacity on-demand service is cheaper than that offered by sun.
looks and music to drive mobiles mobile phones are still enjoying a boom time in sales  according to research from technology analysts gartner.  more than 674 million mobiles were sold last year globally  said the report  the highest total sold to date. the figure was 30% more than in 2003 and surpassed even the most optimistic predictions  gartner said. good design and the look of a mobile  as well as new services such as music downloads  could go some way to pushing up sales in 2005  said analysts. although people were still looking for better replacement phones  there was evidence  according to gartner  that some markets were seeing a slow-down in replacement sales.   all the markets grew apart from japan which shows that replacement sales are continuing in western europe   mobile analyst carolina milanesi told the bbc news website.  japan is where north america and western european markets can be in a couple of years  time.  they already have tv  music  ringtones  cameras  and all that we can think of on mobiles  so people have stopped buying replacement phones.   but there could be a slight slowdown in sales in european and us markets too  according to gartner  as people wait to see what comes next in mobile technology. this means mobile companies have to think carefully about what they are offering in new models so that people see a compelling reason to upgrade  said gartner. third generation mobiles (3g) with the ability to handle large amounts of data transfer  like video  could drive people into upgrading their phones  but ms milanesi said it was difficult to say how quickly that would happen.  at the end of the day  people have cameras and colour screens on mobiles and for the majority of people out there who don t really care about technology the speed of data to a phone is not critical.  nor would the rush to produce two or three megapixel camera phones be a reason for mobile owners to upgrade on its own. the majority of camera phone models are not at the stage where they can compete with digital cameras which also have flashes and zooms.  more likely to drive sales in 2005 would be the attention to design and aesthetics  as well as music services. the motorola razr v3 phone was typical of the attention to design that would be more commonplace in 2005  she added. this was not a  women s thing   she said  but a desire from men and women to have a gadget that is a form of self-expression too. it was not just about how the phone functioned  but about what it said about its owner.  western europe has always been a market which is quite attentive to design   said ms milanesi.   people are after something that is nice-looking  and together with that  there is the entertainment side.  this year music will have a part to play in this.  the market for full-track music downloads was worth just $20 million (£10.5 million) in 2004  but is set to be worth $1.8 billion (£9.4 million) by 2009  according to jupiter research. sony ericsson just released its walkman branded mobile phone  the w800  which combines a digital music player with up to 30 hours  battery life  and a two megapixel camera. in july last year  motorola and apple announced a version of itunes online music downloading service would be released which would be compatible with motorola mobile phones. apple said the new itunes music player would become motorola s standard music application for its music phones. but the challenge will be balancing storage capacity with battery life if mobile music hopes to compete with digital music players like the ipod. ms milanesi said more models would likely be released in the coming year with hard drives. but they would be more likely to compete with the smaller capacity music players that have around four gigabyte storage capacity  which would not put too much strain on battery life.
bt program to beat dialler scams bt is introducing two initiatives to help beat rogue dialler scams  which can cost dial-up net users thousands.  from may  dial-up net users will be able to download free software to stop computers using numbers not on a user s  pre-approved list . inadvertently downloaded by surfers  rogue diallers are programs which hijack modems and dial up a premium rate number when users log on. thousands of uk dial-up users are believed to have been hit by the scam. some people have faced phone bills of up to £2 000. bt s modem protection program will check numbers that are dialled by a computer and will block them if they have not been pre-approved  such as national and net service provider numbers. icstis  the uk s premium rate services watchdog  said it had been looking for companies to take the lead in initiatives.  the initiatives are very welcome   a spokesperson from icstis told the bbc news website.  we are very pleased to see they are putting into place new measures to protect consumers.   the second initiative bt announced is an early warning system which will alert bt customers if there is unusual activity on their phone bills. if a bill rises substantially above its usual daily average  or if a call is made to a suspect number  a text or voice alert will be sent to the user s landline phone. as part of the clamp-down on rogue diallers  companies must now satisfy stringent conditions  including clear terms and conditions  information about how to delete diallers and responsibility for customer refunds. any firm running a dialler without permission can now be closed down by icstis. the watchdog brought in the action last october following a decision to license all companies which wanted to operate legitimate premium rate dialler services.  there are legitimate companies who offer services such as adult content  sports results and music downloads by charging a premium rate rather than by credit card bt said it had ploughed an enormous amount of effort into protecting people from the problem. it has already barred more than 1 000 premium rate numbers and has tried to raise public awareness about the scams.  we now want to ensure there are even stronger safeguards for our customers  who we would urge to make use of these new options to protect themselves   said gavin patterson  group managing director for consumer the arm of bt. both schemes have been undergoing trials in ireland  and will be made available to 20 million bt customers from may.
net fingerprints combat attacks eighty large net service firms have switched on software to spot and stop net attacks automatically.  the system creates digital fingerprints of ongoing incidents that are sent to every network affected. firms involved in the smart sensing system believe it will help trace attacks back to their source. data gathered will be passed to police to help build up intelligence about who is behind worm outbreaks and denial of service attacks.  firms signing up for the sensing system include mci  bt  deutsche telekom  energis  ntt  bell canada and many others. the creation of the fingerprinting system has been brokered by us firm arbor networks and signatures of attacks will be passed to anyone suffering under the weight of an attack. increasingly computer criminals are using swarms of remotely controlled computers to carry out denial of service attacks on websites  launch worms and relay spam around the net.  we have seen attacks involving five and ten gigabytes of traffic   said rob pollard  sales director for arbor networks which is behind the fingerprinting system.  attacks of that size cause collateral damage as they cross the internet before they get to their destination   he said. once an attack is spotted and its signature defined the information will be passed back down the chain of networks affected to help every unwitting player tackle the problem.  mr pollard said arbor was not charging for the service and it would pass on fingerprint data to every network affected.  what we want to do is help net service firms communicate with each other and then push the attacks further and further back around the world to their source   said mr pollard. arbor network s technology works by building up a detailed history of traffic on a network. it spots which computers or groups of users regularly talk to each other and what types of traffic passes between machines or workgroups. any anomaly to this usual pattern is spotted and flagged to network administrators who can take action if the traffic is due to a net-based attack of some kind. this type of close analysis has become very useful as net attacks are increasingly launched using several hundred or thousand different machines. anyone looking at the traffic on a machine by machine basis would be unlikely to spot that they were all part of a concerted attack.  attacks are getting more diffuse and more sophisticated   said malcolm seagrave  security expert at energis.  in the last 12 months it started getting noticeable that criminals were taking to it and we ve seen massive growth.  he said that although informal systems exist to pass on information about attacks  often commercial confidentiality got in the way of sharing enough information to properly combat attacks.
format wars could  confuse users  technology firms sony  philips  matsushita and samsung are developing a common way to stop people pirating digital music and video.  the firms want to make a system that ensures files play on the hardware they make but also thwarts illegal copying. the move could mean more confusion for consumers already faced by many different  and conflicting  content control systems  experts warned. they say there are no guarantees the system will even prevent piracy.  currently many online stores wrap up downloadable files in an own-brand control system that means they can only be played on a small number of media players. systems that limit what people can do with the files they download are known as digital rights management systems. by setting up the alliance to work on a common control system  the firms said they hope to end this current fragmentation of file formats. in a joint statement the firms said they wanted to let consumers enjoy  appropriately licensed video and music on any device  independent of how they originally obtained that content . the firms hope that it will also make it harder for consumers to make illegal copies of the music  movies and other digital content they have bought. called the marlin joint development association  the alliance will define basic specifications that every device made by the electronics firms will conform to. marlin will be built on technology from rights management firm intertrust as well as an earlier drm system developed by a group known as the coral consortium.  the move is widely seen as a way for the four firms to decide their own destiny on content control systems instead of having to sign up for those being pushed by apple and microsoft. confusingly for consumers  the technology that comes out of the alliance will sit alongside the content control systems of rival firms such as microsoft and apple.  in many ways the different drm systems are akin to the different physical formats  such as betamax and vhs  that consumers have seen in the past   said ian fogg  personal technology and broadband analyst at jupiter research.  the difference is that it is very fragmented   he said.  it s not a two-horse race  it s a five  six  seven or even eight-horse race  mr fogg said consumers had to be very careful when buying digital content to ensure that it would play on the devices they own. he said currently there were even incompatibilities within drm families. although initiatives such as microsoft s  plays for sure  program could help remove some of the uncertainty  he said  life was likely to be confusing for consumers for some time to come.  shelley taylor  analyst and author of a report about online music services  said the locks and limits on digital files were done to maximise the cash that firms can make from consumers. apple s itunes service was a perfect example of this  she said.  although itunes has been hugely successful  apple could not justify its existence if it did not help sell all those ipods   she said.  she said rampant competition between online music services  of which there are now 230 according to recent figures  could drive more openness and freer file formats.  it always works out that consumer needs win out in the long run   she said   and the services that win in the long run are the ones that listen to consumers earliest.  ms taylor said the limits legal download services place on files could help explain the continuing popularity of file-sharing systems that let people get hold of pirated pop.  people want portability   she said   and with peer-to-peer they have 100% portability.  cory doctorow  european co-ordinator for the electronic frontier foundation which campaigns for consumers on many cyber-rights issues  expressed doubts that the marlin system would achieve its aims.  not one of these systems has ever prevented piracy or illegal copying   he said. he said many firms readily admit that their drm systems are little protection against skilled attackers such as the organised crime gangs that are responsible for most piracy. instead  said mr doctorow  drm systems were intended to control the group that electronics firms have most hold over - consumers.  the studios and labels perceive an opportunity to sell you your media again and again - the ipod version  the auto version  the american and uk version  the ringtone version  and so on.
ask jeeves joins web log market ask jeeves has bought the bloglines website to improve the way it handles content from web journals or blogs.  the bloglines site has become hugely popular as it gives users one place in which to read  search and share all the blogs they are interested in. ask jeeves said it was not planning to change bloglines but would use the 300 million articles it has archived to round out its index of the web. how much ask jeeves paid for bloglines was not revealed.  bloglines has become popular because it lets users build a list of the blogs they want to follow without having to visit each journal site individually. to do this it makes use of a technology known as really simple syndication (rss) that many blogs have adopted to let other sites know when new entries are made on their journals. the acquisition follows similar moves by other search sites. google acquired pyra labs  makers of the blogger software  in 2003. in 2004 msn introduced its own blog system and yahoo has tweaked its technology to do a better job of handling blog entries. jim lanzone  vice president of search properties at ask jeeves in the us  said it did not acquire bloglines just to get a foothold in the blog publishing world. he said ask jeeves was much more interested in helping people find information they were looking for rather than helping them write it.   the universe of readers is vastly larger than the universe of writers   he said. mr lanzone said the acquisition would sit well with ask s my jeeves service which lets people customise their own web experience and build up a personal collection of useful links.  search engines are about discovering information for the first time and rss is the ideal way to keep track of and monitor those sites   he said. it would also help drive information and entries from blogs to the portals that ask jeeves operates. there would be no instant sweeping changes to bloglines  said mr lanzone.  our intent is to take our time to figure out the right business model not to try to monetise it right away   he said. though mr lanzone added that ask jeeves would be helping organise the database of 300m blog entries bloglines holds with its own net indexing technology.  being able to search the blogosphere as one corpus of information will be very useful in its own right   said mr lanzone. rumours about the acquisition were broken by the napsterization weblog which said it got the hint from ask jeeves insiders.
hitachi unveils  fastest robot  japanese electronics firm hitachi has unveiled its first humanoid robot  called emiew  to challenge honda s asimo and sony s qrio robots.  hitachi said the 1.3m (4.2ft) emiew was the world s quickest-moving robot yet. two wheel-based emiews  pal and chum  introduced themselves to reporters at a press conference in japan. the robots will be guests at the world expo later this month. sony and honda have both built sophisticated robots to show off developments in electronics. explaining why hitachi s emiew used wheels instead of feet  toshihiko horiuchi  from hitachi s mechanical engineering research laboratory  said:  we aimed to create a robot that could live and co-exist with people.   we want to make the robots useful for people ... if the robots moved slower than people  users would be frustrated.  emiew - excellent mobility and interactive existence as workmate - can move at 3.7m/h. its  wheel feet  resemble the bottom half of a segway scooter. with sensors on the head  waist  and near the wheels  pal and chum demonstrated how they could react to commands.  i want to be able to walk about in places like shinjuku and shibuya [shopping districts] in the future without bumping into people and cars   pal told reporters. hitachi said pal and chum  which have a vocabulary of about 100 words  could be  trained  for practical office and factory use in as little as five to six years.  robotics researchers have long been challenged by developing robots that walk in the gait of a human. at the recent aaas (american association for the advancement of science) annual meeting in washington dc  researchers showed off bipedal designs. the three designs  each built by a different research group  use the same principle to achieve a human-like gait.  sony and honda have both used humanoid robots  which are not commercially available  as a way of showing off computing power and engineering expertise. honda s asimo was  born  five years ago. since then  honda and sony s qrio have tried to trump each other with what the robots can do at various technology events. asimo  has visited the uk  germany  the czech republic  france and ireland as part of a world tour. sony s qrio has been singing  jogging and dancing in formation around the world too and was  until last year  the fastest robot on two legs. but its record was beaten by asimo. it is capable of 3km/h  which its makers claim is almost four times as fast as qrio. last year  car maker toyota also stepped into the ring and unveiled its trumpet-playing humanoid robot. by 2007  it is predicted that there will be almost 2.5 million  entertainment and leisure  robots in homes  compared to about 137 000 currently  according to the united nations (un). by the end of that year  4.1 million robots will be doing jobs in homes  said the report by the un economic commission for europe and the international federation of robotics. hitachi is one of the companies with home cleaning robot machines on the market.
consumers  snub portable video  consumers want music rather than movies while on the move  says a report.  produced by jupiter research the analysis of the portable media player market found only 13% of europeans want to watch video while out and about. by contrast  almost a third are interested in listening to music on a portable player such as an ipod. the firm said gadget makers should avoid hybrid devices and instead make sure music reproduction was as good as possible.  the report concluded that the driving force behind the growth of europe s portable player market was likely to be music  rather than films or any combination of the two. barely 5% of those questioned said they wanted a player that could play back both music and movies. only 7% wanted a player that could handle games and video.   dedicated music players are the only established digital media players in europe today despite their high prices   said ian fogg  jupiter analyst. mr fogg said although video players and smartphones were trying to cash in on this success they faced a tough job because of the compromises that had to be made when creating a dual-purpose device.  europeans care most about music playback   he said. the report showed that 27% of consumers asked are interested in portable music players. the research revealed that french  39%  and british  31%  consumers were most interested in music players. mr fogg said portable video players were likely to remain a niche product that would not be able to compete with devices dedicated to music playback.  a separate report by jupiter forecasts that the european digital music market will grow to 836m euros (£581m) by 2009. at the end of 2003  the market was worth 10.6m euros (£7.36m). digital music players will be behind this market growth said jupiter . apple s ipod was launched in october 2001  but the portable music player market has been growing steadily since the launch of the creative nomad jukebox in mid-2000. now consumers face an almost overwhelming choice of high-capacity portable music players that let them store every track on every cd that they own.
nintendo handheld given euro date nintendo s new handheld console  the ds  will launch in europe on 11 march  the company has announced.  the portable games machine  which features touch-screen control  will retail for £99 in the uk (149 euros). nintendo said 15 games would be available in the uk at launch  with prices ranging from £19 to £29. more than 2.8 million ds consoles have been sold since it first appeared in the us and japan at the end of 2004. rival sony has said it will launch its first handheld console  the psp  in the us and europe before the end of march. the psp is expected to compete for a large part of the same handheld market  despite sony s assertion that the machines are aimed at different consumers.  the 15 games available on the european launch date will include nintendo s super mario 64 ds  as well as titles from third-party developers such as ubisoft s rayman ds.  more than 120 games are in development for the new console  nintendo has said. the ds is backwards compatible with the game boy advance  allowing the earlier machine s back catalogue of 700 games to be played. additionally  a short-range wireless link for multiplayer gaming is built in to the ds  with a  download play  option which allows a group to play against each other  even if just one person owns a copy. other features include a short-range messaging application called pictochat  and a built-in microphone which is used in sega s launch title project rub. nintendo has also announced a media adapter  which will allow the console to play music and video on the move.  the launch price of £99 (149 euros) compares favourably with the us price of $149  according to john houlihan  editor of the computerandvideogames.com magazine.  it s a very  very competitive price point. there are some innovative features  and nintendo has created quite a buzz   he says.  however  the line-up of games could have been stronger. everyone wanted to see the eight-player mario kart ds  for example.   mr houlihan believes that there is likely to be an audience for both the nintendo ds and sony s new psp  with the former aimed largely at a younger audience and the latter expected to be marketed as a multimedia device.  the psp is a sexy bit of kit  but sony s attitude to the psp has been very understated in europe  so far   mr houlihan said. the worldwide handheld software market had an estimated worth of $2.6bn at the end of 2004  according to industry analysts screen digest.  in the past  games consoles and handhelds have generally launched much later in europe than in other parts of the world. however nintendo president satoru iwata said the company was  pleased to have offered such a short period of time between the us and european launch .  europe is an extremely important market for nintendo   mr iwata added. nintendo raised its sales targets for the ds console last december after selling a million in the us and japan in just a few weeks.
attack prompts bush site block the official re-election site of president george w bush is blocking visits from overseas users for  security reasons .  the blocking began early on monday so those outside the us and trying to view the site got a message saying they are not authorised to view it. but keen net users have shown that the policy is not being very effective. many have found that the site can still be viewed by overseas browsers via several alternative net addresses.  the policy of trying to stop overseas visitors viewing the site is thought to have been adopted in response to an attack on the georgewbush.com website. scott stanzel  a spokesman for the bush-cheney campaign said:  the measure was taken for security reasons.  he declined to elaborate any further on the blocking policy. the barring of non-us visitors has led to the campaign being inundated with calls and forced it to make a statement about why the blocking was taking place. in early october a so-called  denial of service  attack was mounted on the site that bombarded it with data from thousands of pcs. the attack made the site unusable for about five hours.  about the same time the web team of the bush-cheney campaign started using the services of a company called akamai that helps websites deal with the ebbs and flows of visitor traffic. akamai uses a web-based tool called edgescape that lets its customers work out where visitors are based. typically this tool is used to ensure that webpages  video and images load quickly but it can also be used to block traffic. geographic blocking works because the numerical addresses that the net uses to organise itself are handed out on a regional basis. readers of the boingboing weblog have found that viewers can still get at the site by using alternative forms of the george w bush domain name. ironically one of the working alternatives is for a supposedly more secure version of the site. there are now at least three working alternative domains for the bush-cheney campaign that let web users outside the us visit the site. the site can also be seen using anonymous proxy services that are based in the us. some web users in canada also report that they can browse the site.  the international exclusion zone around georgewbush.com was spotted by net monitoring firm netcraft which keeps an eye on traffic patterns across many different sites.  netcraft said that since the early hours of 25 october attempts to view the site through its monitoring stations in london  amsterdam and sydney have failed. by contrast netcraft s four monitoring stations in the us managed to view the site with no problems. data gathered by netcraft on the pattern of traffic to the site shows that the blocking is not the result of another denial of service attack. mike prettejohn  netcraft president  speculated that the blocking decision might have been taken to cut costs  and traffic  in the run-up to the election on 2 november. he said the site may see no reason to distribute content to people who will not be voting next week. managing traffic could also be a good way to ensure that the site stays working in the closing days of the election campaign. however  simply blocking non-us visitors also means that americans overseas are barred too. most american soldiers stationed overseas will be able to see the site as they use the us military s own portion of the net. akamai declined to comment  saying it could not talk about customer websites.
when technology gets personal in 2020  whipping out your mobile phone to make a call will be quaintly pass&#233;. by then phones will be printed directly on to wrists  or other parts of the body  says ian pearson  bt s resident futurologist.  it s all part of what s known as a  pervasive ambient world   where  chips are everywhere . mr pearson does not have a crystal ball. his job is to formulate ideas based on what science and technology are doing now  to guide industries into the future. inanimate objects will start to interact with us: we will be surrounded - on streets  in homes  in appliances  on our bodies and possibly in our heads - by things that  think . forget local area networks - these will be body area networks. ideas about just how smart  small  or even invisible  technology will get are always floating around. images of devices clumsily bolted on to heads or wrists have pervaded thinking about future technology. but now a new vision is surfacing  where smart fabrics and textiles will be exploited to enhance functionality  form  or aesthetics. such materials are already starting to change how gadgets and electronics are used and designed.  so mp3 players - the mass gadget of the moment - will disappear and instead become integrated into one s clothing  says mr pearson.  so the gadgets that fill up your handbag  when we integrate those into fabric  we can actually get rid of all that stuff. you won t necessarily see the electronics.  wearable technology could exploit body heat to charge it up  while  video tattoos   or intelligent electronic contact lenses  might function as tv screens for those on the move. however  this future of highly personal devices  where technology is worn  or even fuses with the body itself  raises ethical questions. if technology is going to be increasingly part of clothing  jewellery  and skin  there needs to be some serious thinking about what it means for us as humans  says baroness susan greenfield. at a recent conference for technology  engineering  academic and fashion industry experts  at the royal society in london  neuroscientist baroness greenfield cautioned we  can t just sleepwalk into the future .  yet this technology is already upon us. researchers have developed computers and sensors worn in clothing. mp3 jackets  based on the idea that electrically conductive fabric can connect to keyboard sewn into sleeves  have already appeared in shops.  these  smart fabrics  have come about through advances in nano- and micro-engineering - the ability to manipulate and exploit materials at micro or molecular scale. at the nanoscale  materials can be  tuned  to display unusual properties that can be exploited to build faster  lighter  stronger and more efficient devices and systems. the textile and clothing industry has been one of the first to exploit nanotechnology in quite straightforward ways. many developments are appearing in real products in the fields of medicine  defence  healthcare  sports  and communications. professional swimming suits reduce drag by incorporating tiny structures similar to shark skin. nanoscale titanium dioxide (tio2) coatings give fabrics antibacterial and anti-odour properties. these have special properties which can be activated in contact with the air or uv light. such coatings have already been used to stop socks smelling for instance  to turn airline seats into super stain-resistant surfaces  and applied to windows so they clean themselves. dressings for wounds can now incorporate nanoparticles with biocidal properties and smart patches are being developed to deliver drugs through the skin. but baroness greenfield is concerned about how far this more personal contact with technology might affect our very being. if our clothing  skin  and  personal body networks  do the talking and the monitoring  everywhere we go  we have to think about what that means for our concept of privacy. mr pearson picks up the theme  pointing out there are a lot of issues humans have to iron out before we become  cyborgian . his main concern is  privacy .  we are looking at electronics which are really in deep contact with your body and a lot of that information you really don t want every passer-by to know.  so we have to make sure we build security in this. if you are wearing smart make-up  where electronics are controlling the appearance  you don t want people hacking in and writing messages on your forehead.  as technology infiltrates our biology  how will our brains function differently   we cannot arrogantly assume that the human brain will not change with this   warns baroness greenfield. there have already been successful experiments to grow human nerve cells on circuit boards. this paves the way for brain implants to help paralysed people interface directly with computers. clearly  the organic  carbon of our bodies and silicon is increasingly merging. the cyborg - a very familiar part-human  part-inorganic science fiction and academic idea - is on its way.
broadband steams ahead in the us more and more americans are joining the internet s fast lane  according to official figures.  the number of people and business connected to broadband jumped by 38% in a year  said the us federal communications commission (fcc). in a report  it said there were more than 32 million broadband connections by the end of june 2004. but the us is still behind compared to other nations  ranked 13th in the world by a un telecoms body.  during his 2004 re-election campaign  president george w bush pledge to ensure that affordable high-speed net access would be available to all americans by 2007.  according to the report by the fcc  broadband is becoming increasingly popular  with people using it for research and shopping  as well as downloading music and watching video. the total number of people and businesses on broadband rose by to 32.5 million in the year ending june 2004  compared to 23.5 million in june 2003. whereas in the uk  most people hook up to broadband via asymmetric digital subscriber line (adsl) technology which lets ordinary copper phone lines support high data speeds. but in the us  cable leads the way  accounting for 18.6 million lines. broadband over the phone line makes up 11.4 million connections  according to the fcc figures.
the future in your pocket if you are a geek or gadget fan  the next 12 months look like they are going to be a lot of fun.  the relentless pace of development in the hi-tech world and rampant competition in many of its sectors  particularly among mobile phone firms  all suggests that 2005 is going to be a very good year. to begin with  2005 will be the year that third-generation (3g) mobile phones become inescapable. the 3 network launched in 2003  vodafone launched its consumer service in november  orange followed in early december and t-mobile and o2 are due to launch in 2005. the main result of these launches will likely be a slew of good deals for consumers as operators try to poach new customers from rivals and convince existing users to trade up.  already the extra capacity in 3g networks lets 3 offer good deals on voice calls at rates that will probably have to be matched by the other operators. but the shift in technology and low cost of voice calls means that operators lose a significant chunk of their revenue.  show me an operator that believes their voice business can sustain them  and i ll write their obituary  said niel ransom  chief technology officer at alcatel.  instead operators are likely to push all other things that 3g phones can do such as video messaging and other multimedia capabilities. already camera phones look set to challenge digital cameras and are likely to win more fans as multi-megapixel devices go on sale. but 3g will not have everything its own way. it will face competition from emerging technologies such as wimax. this wireless technology can boost data transmission speeds up to 75 megabits per second and works over distances of up to 30 miles. kent is likely to be the site of the uk s first wimax network which is due to go live in 2005 and it could be the way that rural areas get high-speed net access. analyst firm telecom view predicts that wimax will steal a lot of market share from 3g and will be a clear winner. bob larribeau  principal analyst at telecom view  said the better return on investment offered by technologies such as wimax could dent the possible returns of 3g networks. and the growing ubiquity of wi-fi must not be forgotten either. the technology is popping up in more places than ever and its wider use is only held back by the price differences across countries and suppliers.  moves to unite mobile and fixed phones look set to get more emphasis in 2005 too.  for a start  bt looks set to roll out its bluephone project during the next 12 months. the service revolves around a hybrid device that uses the mobile networks when you are out and about but switches back to the fixed line when you are at home. fixed line phones will also start to get much more serious competition from a technology that has the formidable name of voice over ip (voip). voip routes calls via the net instead of the fixed line phone network. anyone with a broadband connection  which is now more than 50% of the uk s net using population  can use voip and could slash their monthly phone bills if they used it. telecommunications regulator ofcom has declared 056 to be the area code for voip calls and 2005 is likely to see a lot more consumer-focused voip call services starting up. home broadband services will also start to increase in speed as dwindling numbers of new users signing force the pace of competition. if 2004 has been the year of the portable music player  they 2005 looks like it will be the year of the portable media player. motorola has just announced a deal with apple to produce a phone that works with the itunes service and other hybrid gadgets that sport a big memory and lots of other functions will become commonplace. the pace of advancement in storage media will continue mean that the cost per megabyte of memory will plummet. some of those devices will sport huge hard drives letting you store more data than you ever wanted or knew you had. convergence could mean that single-function devices start to dwindle in number. instead every gadget will be able to do almost anything and communicate almost any way you want. the only downside is that consumers will face a series of tough choices as they are confronted by a bewildering array of gadgets each with an enormous numbers of features and vast data holding capacities. but that is the kind of problem most gadget fans can live with.
microsoft debuts security tools microsoft is releasing tools that clean up pcs harbouring viruses and spyware.  the virus-fighting program will be updated monthly and is a precursor to microsoft releasing dedicated anti-virus software. also being released is a software utility that will help users find and remove any spyware on their home computer. although initially free it is thought that soon microsoft will be charging users for the anti-spyware tool.  the anti-spyware tool is available now and the anti-virus utility is expected to be available later this month. microsoft s windows operating system has long been a favourite of people who write computer viruses because it is so ubiquitous and has many loopholes that can be exploited. it has proved such a tempting target that there are now thought to be more than 100 000 viruses and other malicious programs in existence. latest research suggests that new variants of viruses are being cranked out at a rate of up to 200 per week. spyware is surreptitious software that sneaks on to home computers  often without users  knowledge. in its most benign form it just bombards users with pop-up adverts or hijacks web browser settings. the most malicious forms steal confidential information or log every keystroke that users make. surveys have shown that most pcs are infested with spyware. research by technology firms earthlink and webroot revealed that 90% of windows machine have the malicious software on board and  on average  each one harbours 28 separate spyware programs. before now microsoft has left the market for pc security software to specialist firms such as symantec  mcafee  trend micro and many others. it said that its virus cleaning program would not stop machines being infected nor remove the need for other anti-virus programs. on spyware freely available programs such as ad-aware and spybot have become widely used by people keen to keep the latest variants at bay. microsoft s two security tools have emerged as a result of acquisitions the company has made over the last two years. in 2003 it bought romanian firm gecad software to get hold of its anti-virus technology. in december 2004 it bought new york-based anti-spyware firm giant company software. last year microsoft also released the sp2 upgrade for windows xp that closed many security loopholes in the software and made it easier for people to manage their anti-virus and firewall programs.
new consoles promise big problems making games for future consoles will require more graphic artists and more money  an industry conference has been told.  sony  microsoft and nintendo will debut their new consoles at the annual e3 games expo in los angeles in may. these so-called  next generation  machines will be faster than current consoles  and capable of displaying much higher-quality visuals. for gamers  this should make for better  more immersive games. in a pre-recorded video slot during microsoft s keynote address at the game developers conference  held last week in san francisco  famed director james cameron revealed he is making a game in tandem with his next film - believed to be battle angel alita. the game s visual quality would be  like a lucid dream   said mr cameron. but numerous speakers warned that creating such graphics will require more artists  and so next generation console games will be much more expensive to develop. the first new console  microsoft s xbox 2  is not expected to reach the shops until the end of 2005. games typically take at least 18 months to create  however  so developers are grappling with the hardware today.  according to robert walsh  head of brisbane-based game developer krome studios  next generation games will cost between $10-25m to make  with teams averaging 80 staff in size taking two years to complete a title. such sums mean it will be difficult for anyone to start a new game studio  said mr walsh.  if you re a start-up  i doubt that a publisher is going to walk in and give you a cheque for $10m  however good you are   he said. mr walsh suggested that new studios should make games for mobile phones and handheld consoles like the sony psp and the nintendo ds  since they are cheaper and easier to create than console games.  one developer bucking the trend towards big art teams is will wright  the creator of the best-selling the sims games. the founder of california s maxis studio surprised the conference with a world exclusive preview of his next game  spore. spore will allow players to experiment with the evolution of digital creatures. starting with an amoeba-sized organism  the player will guide the physical development of their creature by selecting how its limbs  jaws and other body parts evolve.  eventually the creature will become capable of establishing cities  trading and fighting  and even building space ships. advanced players will visit the home planets of creatures created by other spore players. these worlds will be automatically swapped across the internet. mr wright said that enabling players to devise and share their creatures would make them care more about the game.  i don t want to put the player in the role of luke skywalker or frodo baggins - i want them to be george lucas or dr seuss   explained mr wright. few games have hinted at the scope of spore  but mr wright explained that he has nevertheless kept his development team small by hiring expert programmers. instead of employing lots of artists to create 3d models of the digital creatures  spore generates and displays the creatures according to rules devised by the programmers.  the thing i am coming away with [from the conference] is that next generation content is going to be really expensive  and creating it will drive the smaller players out of the market   said mr wright.  i d like to offer an alternative to that.   new development tools will be another important aid in making next generation games  and dozens of companies demonstrated their latest products at the conference.  oxford-based natural motion launched endorphin v2.0  which enables artists to direct a 3d  virtual actor . the actor is realistically modelled according to the laws of physics. endorphin simulates how the actor falls down stairs  for instance  or crumples up after a gunshot. artists can blend together these visual sequences  and include the results in their games. the process is much quicker than having an artist animate each movement by hand  and so lessens the need for larger art teams. another british company aiming to reduce the workload of artists is manchester start-up genemation. its latest tool  gencrowd  enables artists to create unique  photo-realistic human faces for games involving lots of people. gencrowd works by blending together elements of an in-built supply of stock faces of differing ages and ethnicities. the software can create up to 2 000 new heads an hour.  one area not yet dominated by graphical blockbusters is mobile phone games. even the latest phones are not as powerful as the consoles of a decade ago  so smaller teams of half a dozen people can still create complete games for the devices.  the game developers conference included a special two-day summit dedicated to creating mobile games. a niche attraction for a few dozen conference attendees when it began five years ago  gdc s mobile summit this year drew several hundred delegates. mobile games are a fast-growing sector because newer phones have better graphics and sound  and are thus more suitable for playing games. furthermore  the adoption of mobile phones continues to spread across the world. it s predicted that by 2006 two billion people will own a mobile phone. the growing importance of mobile gaming was reflected by a keynote given by john batter  general manager at ea mobile. ea mobile is a division of electronic arts  the biggest games publisher. until recently electronic arts had been dismissive of games for phones.  the last time you checked  ea wasn t in this business   mr batter admitted. but he said ea now planned on dominating the market by releasing mobile versions of its most popular franchises. ea plans to release up to 20 mobile games over the next 12 months. the first will be a version of its need for speed racing game  created by ea mobile s 30-person development team. mr batter predicted that by 2006  mobile phones would be capable of running games of comparable quality to those on sony s upcoming psp handheld console.  owain bennallack is the editor of develop magazine.
digital guru floats sub-$100 pc nicholas negroponte  chairman and founder of mit s media labs  says he is developing a laptop pc that will go on sale for less than $100 (£53).  he told the bbc world service programme go digital he hoped it would become an education tool in developing countries. he said one laptop per child could be   very important to the development of not just that child but now the whole family  village and neighbourhood . he said the child could use the laptop like a text book. he described the device as a stripped down laptop  which would run a linux-based operating system   we have to get the display down to below $20  to do this we need to rear project the image rather than using an ordinary flat panel.   the second trick is to get rid of the fat   if you can skinny it down you can gain speed and the ability to use smaller processors and slower memory.  the device will probably be exported as a kit of parts to be assembled locally to keep costs down. mr negroponte said this was a not for profit venture  though he recognised that the manufacturers of the components would be making money. in 1995 mr negroponte published the bestselling being digital  now widely seen as predicting the digital age. the concept is based on experiments in the us state of maine  where children were given laptop computers to take home and do their work on.  while the idea was popular amongst the children  it initially received some resistance from the teachers and there were problems with laptops getting broken. however  mr negroponte has adapted the idea to his own work in cambodia where he set up two schools together with his wife and gave the children laptops.  we put in 25 laptops three years ago   only one has been broken  the kids cherish these things  it s also a tv a telephone and a games machine  not just a textbook.  mr negroponte wants the laptops to become more common than mobile phones but conceded this was ambitious.  nokia make 200 million cell phones a year  so for us to claim we re going to make 200 million laptops is a big number  but we re not talking about doing it in three or five years  we re talking about months.  he plans to be distributing them by the end of 2006 and is already in discussion with the chinese education ministry who are expected to make a large order.  in china they spend $17 per child per year on textbooks. that s for five or six years  so if we can distribute and sell laptops in quantities of one million or more to ministries of education that s cheaper and the marketing overheads go away.
gadget market  to grow in 2005  the explosion in consumer technology is to continue into 2005  delegates at the world s largest gadget show  in las vegas  have been told.  the number of gadgets in the shops is predicted to grow by 11%  while devices which talk to each other will become increasingly important.  everything is going digital   kirsten pfeifer from the consumer electronics association  told the bbc news website. the consumer electronics show (ces) featured the pick of 2005 s products.  consumers are controlling what they want and technologies like hdtvs [high-definition tvs]  digital radio  and digital cameras will remain strong in 2005.  all the products on show really showed the breadth and depth of the industry.  despite showing diversity  some delegates attending complained that the showcase lacked as much  wow factor  as in previous years.  the portable technologies on show also reflected one of the buzzwords of ces  which was the  time and place shifting  of multimedia content - being able to watch and listen to video and music anywhere  at any time. at the start of last year s ces  the cea predicted there would be an average growth of 4% in 2004. that figure was surpassed with the rise in popularity of portable digital music players  personal video recorders and digital cameras. it was clear also that gadgets are becoming a lot more about lifestyle choice  with fashion and personalisation becoming increasingly key to the way gadgets are designed. part of this has been the rise in spending power of the  generation x-ers  who have grown up with technology and who now have the spending power and desire for more devices that suit them. more than 57% of the consumer electronics market is made up of female buyers  according to cea research. hybrid devices  which combine a number of multimedia functions  were also in evidence on the show floor.  a lot of this is driven by just the ability to do it   said stephen baker  a consumer electronics analyst with retail research firm npd group.  some of these functions cost next to nothing to add.   as well as the show floor showcasing everything from tiny wearable mp3 players to giant high-definition tvs  several keynote speeches were made by industry leaders  such as microsoft chief bill gates. despite several embarrassing technical glitches during mr gate s pre-show speech  he announced several new partnerships - mainly for the us market. he unveiled new ways of letting people take tv shows recorded on personal video recorders and watch them back on portable devices. he disappointed some  however  by failing to announce any details of the next generation of the xbox games console. another disappointment was the lack of exposure sony s new portable games device  the psp  had at the show. sony said the much-anticipated gadget would most likely start shipping in march for the us and europe. it went on sale in japan before christmas. there were only two psps embedded in glass cabinets at the show though and no representatives to discuss further details. a sony representative told the bbc news website this was because sony did not consider it to be part of their  consumer technology  offering.  elsewhere at the show  there was a plethora of colour and plasma screens  including samsung s 102-inch (2.6 metre) plasma - the largest in the world. industry experts were also excited about high-definition technologies coming to the fore in 2005  with new formats for dvds coming out which will hold six times as much data as conventional dvds. with so many devices on the move there were a lot of products on show offering external storage  like seagate s 5gb pocket sized external hard drive  which won an innovation for engineering and design prize. more than 120 000 trade professionals attended ces in las vegas  which officially ran from 6 to 9 january.
how to make a greener computer the hi-tech industry is starting to get more environmentally aware. bill thompson thinks it s about time.  my first car ran on four star petrol and pumped vast quantities of lead into the atmosphere as i drove around cambridge. now you can t buy petrol with lead additives  and we re all better off as a result. chip giant intel recently began shipping computer circuit boards that are lead free too  reflecting a growing awareness on the part of the technology industry that products have to be designed and built in more environmentally friendly ways.  apart from reducing the use of toxic materials like arsenic  mercury  cadmium and other heavy metals in the products themselves  the manufacturing process is also being cleaned up  with fewer complex and potentially damaging organic chemicals used as solvents. and work is going into making power supplies that are more energy efficient  since current transformers are astonishingly wasteful as they charge our laptops  mobiles and music players.  one of the key aspects of the new approach is to design products that are easier to recycle. if you have got a phone or a computer with toxic chemicals or heavy metals in it then extracting them can be tricky and expensive. a well-designed electronic component is able to be recycled at low cost. this is going to be very important to hardware manufacturers in europe since from august the new waste electronic and electrical equipment directive will oblige them to accept returned products for recycling.  they will end up paying if they build things that are expensive or impossible to take apart and will find their profits hit  something which is likely to motivate them where appeals to the wider public interest might fall on deaf ears. it is  as they say  about time. we have a long and depressing history of developing new technologies with complete disregard for their potential impact on the environment  and waiting until there is a crisis looming before we try to redesign them to cause less damage. the car engine is a case in point: lead additives helped stop petrol vapour exploding too early in the cylinder  a phenomenon called  knocking   so they were simply used without any real thought for the fact that the lead would end up in the atmosphere. redesigning engines and making petrol slightly different was a lot more work  so it took decades before it was done. we re seeing the same thing in the technology industry and  as a result  there are billions of devices  from old mobile phones to antique handhelds  that will have to be recycled in years to come. if apple gets its way then a lot of people are going to be buying a new mac mini and throwing away their old pc  keeping the monitor and other peripherals.  even if apple does not get its way  four or five-year-old computers are not good enough to run modern programs and it s not unreasonable to replace them. but what do we do with the old ones   i ve just looked around my office and i find two monitors  an old 386 pc  two old handhelds  three ancient laptops  four antique mobile phones  a collection of rechargeable batteries and even a sun workstation that is no longer really much use. they are all old enough to be hazardous waste - the monitors alone will be full of arsenic and lead - but it s possible that some of the components could be useful. i could take them up the to the council recycling centre  but it s a 10-mile drive away across town  and like many other people my commitment to recycling is shallow at best. here in cambridge we have green bins for compostable waste  a box for glass  cans and paper that can be recycled  and a black bin for the rest. there are bottle banks and clothing banks scattered around town and in supermarket car parks. would it be too much to ask for an electronics recycling box too  i d probably remember to take my old mobile with me to the supermarket and drop it in a box - at least eventually.  bill thompson is a regular commentator on the bbc world service programme go digital.
mobile audio enters new dimension as mobile phones move closer to being a ubiquitous  all-in-one media player  audio is becoming ever more important. but how good can that sound be from such a small device   the sound of a buzzing bee jumps from left to right before disappearing around the back of my head. the surround sound demo is unremarkable when heard on a multi-speaker home cinema system but startling when emerging from a small mobile phone. british firm sonaptic is one of a number of companies to have developed 3d audio technology that emerges from stereo speakers. firms am3d and srs both offer stereo-widening technology for mobile phones. but sonaptic s managing director david monteith says his firm is the only company to offer positional 3d audio on a mobile.   there are quite a few basic technologies out there  making the sound seem a bit bigger  headphones a bit nicer.   no-one has really tried before to make proper 3d positional audio - where an individual channel can be moved around.  sonaptic has been working with japanese mobile network ntt docomo to set standards for 3d audio on mobile phones. in the last few months handsets from nec  fujitsu and mitsubishi have been released on to the japanese marker which have chips produced by yamaha and rohm with sonaptic s technology.  the technology has been around on pcs and games consoles for some time but what we are doing is making it more efficient so it can go on a small consumer device like a mobile phone   said mr monteith.  the technology works through applying the science of psychoacoustics and grew out of medical research done by the company s research director dr alastair sibbald.  we are basically trying to fool your ears into thinking sound is coming from areas it actually isn t.  your brain uses certain bits of information which we are effectively synthesising on a mobile phone handset.  the structure of the ear works as a 3d encoder for sound - helping the brain understand from where sound is emanating. sonaptic s audio processing algorithms mimic that 3d encoding  giving the impression that sound is coming from the left  right  and behind a listener when in fact it is coming from a single source. mr montieth says:  if the sound is off to one side it will get to one ear before the other - if it is on the right it has to bend around your head to get to your left ear.   the shape of your ear causes differences in sound from one ear to the other. we are synthesising those differences.  sonaptic hopes the technology will have a big impact in the growing market of mobile gaming and music downloading.  handhelds often have limitations - screens will be small by definition.  if you want to get impact from media you are running - either a movie  a game or watching tv - if you want it to be more immersive then our technology can help.  a fishing game is the first title to use the technology  creating a 3d sound field while the gamer plays. driving games and shoot  em ups using the technology are in development. the technology can also be used for music - giving songs a much more expansive and immersive feel. sonaptic offers its technology on a chip or in software and is about to release a new version which significantly improves the efficiency of the audio processing.  it s important we only use 10 or 15% of the processor otherwise you won t be able to play a game on the handset   explained mr montieth. the company is now looking to the us and european markets  where it has been working with network vodafone.  we have focused first on japan because it has a very advanced mobile phone market.  we knew japan would be the first place to have the handsets that could use our technology.  there should be handsets out in the uk in the next six months.
freeze on anti-spam campaign a campaign by lycos europe to target spam-related websites appears to have been put on hold.  earlier this week the company released a screensaver that bombarded the sites with data to try to bump up the running costs of the websites. but the site hosting the screensaver now displays a pink graphic and the words  stay tuned . no one at lycos was available for comment on latest developments in its controversial anti-spam campaign.  lycos europe s  make love not spam  campaign was intended as a way for users to fight back against the mountain of junk mail flooding inboxes. people were encouraged to download the screensaver which  when their pc was idle  would then send lots of data to sites that peddle the goods and services mentioned in spam messages. lycos said the idea was to get the spam sites running at 95% capacity and generate big bandwidth bills for the spammers behind the sites. but the plan has proved controversial.  monitoring firm netcraft analysed response times for some of the sites targeted by the screensaver and found that a number were completely knocked offline.  the downing of the sites could dent lycos claims that what it is doing does not amount to a distributed denial of service attack. in such attacks thousands of computers bombard sites with data in an attempt to overwhelm them. laws in many countries do not explicitly outlaw such attacks but many nations are re-drafting computer use laws to make them specific offences. lycos europe now appears to have put the plan on hold. the site hosting the screensaver currently shows a holding page  with the words   stay tuned . the numerical internet address of the site has also changed. this is likely to be in response to spammers who have reportedly redirected traffic from their sites back to the lycos screensaver site. the campaign has come under fire from some corners of the web. many discussion groups have said that it set a dangerous precedent and could incite vigilantism.  attacking a spammer s website is like poking a grizzly bear sleeping in your back garden with a pointy stick   said graham cluley  senior technology consultant for sophos.  not only is this screensaver similar in its approach to a potentially illegal distributed denial of service attack  but it also is in danger of turning innocent computer users into vigilantes  who may not be prepared for whatever retaliation the spammers care to dream up.
microsoft takes on desktop search microsoft has entered the desktop search fray  releasing a test version of its tool to find documents  e-mails and other files on a pc hard drive.  the beta program only works on pcs running windows xp or windows 2000. the desktop search market is becoming increasingly crowded with firms touting programs that help people find files. search giant google launched its desktop search tool in october  while yahoo is planning to release similar software in january.   our ambition for search is to provide the ultimate information tool that can find anything you re looking for   said yusuf mehdi  corporate vice president at microsoft s msn internet division. microsoft s program can be used as a toolbar on the windows desktop  the internet explorer browser and within the outlook e-mail program. the software giant is coming late to the desktop search arena  competing with a large number of rivals. google has already released a desktop tool. yahoo is planning to get into the game in january and aol is expected to offer desktop searching early next year. small firms such as blinkx  copernic  enfish x1 technologies and x-friend offer tools that catalogue the huge amounts of information that people increasingly store on their desktop or home computer. apple will release a similar search system for its computers called spotlight that is due to be released with the tiger operating system.
freeze on anti-spam campaign a campaign by lycos europe to target spam-related websites appears to have been put on hold.  earlier this week the company released a screensaver that bombarded the sites with data to try to bump up the running costs of the websites. but the site hosting the screensaver now displays a pink graphic and the words  stay tuned . no one at lycos was available for comment on latest developments in its controversial anti-spam campaign.  lycos europe s  make love not spam  campaign was intended as a way for users to fight back against the mountain of junk mail flooding inboxes. people were encouraged to download the screensaver which  when their pc was idle  would then send lots of data to sites that peddle the goods and services mentioned in spam messages. lycos said the idea was to get the spam sites running at 95% capacity and generate big bandwidth bills for the spammers behind the sites. but the plan has proved controversial.  monitoring firm netcraft analysed response times for some of the sites targeted by the screensaver and found that a number were completely knocked offline.  the downing of the sites could dent lycos claims that what it is doing does not amount to a distributed denial of service attack. in such attacks thousands of computers bombard sites with data in an attempt to overwhelm them. laws in many countries do not explicitly outlaw such attacks but many nations are re-drafting computer use laws to make them specific offences. lycos europe now appears to have put the plan on hold. the site hosting the screensaver currently shows a holding page  with the words   stay tuned . the numerical internet address of the site has also changed. this is likely to be in response to spammers who have reportedly redirected traffic from their sites back to the lycos screensaver site. the campaign has come under fire from some corners of the web. many discussion groups have said that it set a dangerous precedent and could incite vigilantism.  attacking a spammer s website is like poking a grizzly bear sleeping in your back garden with a pointy stick   said graham cluley  senior technology consultant for sophos.  not only is this screensaver similar in its approach to a potentially illegal distributed denial of service attack  but it also is in danger of turning innocent computer users into vigilantes  who may not be prepared for whatever retaliation the spammers care to dream up.
brainwave  cap controls computer a team of us researchers has shown that controlling devices with the brain is a step closer.  four people  two of them partly paralysed wheelchair users  successfully moved a computer cursor while wearing a cap with 64 electrodes. previous research has shown that monkeys can control a computer with electrodes implanted into their brain. the new york team reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences.  the results show that people can learn to use scalp-recorded electroencephalogram rhythms to control rapid and accurate movement of a cursor in two directions   said jonathan wolpaw and dennis mcfarlane. the research team  from new york state department of health and state university of new york in albany  said the research was another step towards people controlling wheelchairs or other electronic devices by thought.  the four people faced a large video screen wearing a special cap which  meant no surgery or implantation was needed.  brain activity produces electrical signals that can be read by electrodes. complex algorithms then translate those signals into instructions to direct the computer. such brain activity does not require the use of any nerves of muscles  so people with stroke or spinal cord injuries could use the cap effectively.  the impressive non-invasive multidimensional control achieved in the present study suggests that a non-invasive brain control interface could support clinically useful operation of a robotic arm  a motorised wheelchair or a neuroprosthesis   said the researchers. the four volunteers also showed that they could get better at controlling the cursor the more times they tried. although the two partially-paralysed people performed better overall  the researchers said this could be because their brains were more used to adapting or that they were simply more motivated. it is not the first time researchers have had this sort of success in brain-control experiments. some teams have used eye motion and other recording techniques. earlier this year  a team at the mit media labs europe demonstrated a wireless cap which read brain waves to control a computer character.
us peer-to-peer pirates convicted the first convictions for piracy over peer-to-peer networks have been handed down in the us.  new yorker william trowbridge and texan michael chicoine have pleaded guilty to charges that they infringed copyright by illegally sharing music  movies and software. the two men faced charges following raids in august on suspected pirates by the fbi. the pair face jail terms of up to five years and a $250 000 (£130 000) fine.  in a statement the us department of justice said the two men operated the central hubs in a piracy community organised across the direct connect peer-to-peer network. the piracy group called itself the underground network and membership of it demanded that users share between one and 100 gigabytes of files. direct connect allows users to set themselves up as central servers that act as co-ordinating spots for sharers. users would swap files  such as films and music  by exchanging data over the network. during its investigation fbi agents reportedly downloaded 84 movies  40 software programs  13 games and 178  sound recordings  from the five hubs that made up the larger piracy group. the raids were organised under the umbrella of operation digital gridlock which was aimed at fighting  criminal copyright theft on peer-to-peer networks . in total  six raids were carried out in august. five were on the homes of suspected copyright thieves and one on a net service firm. the department of justice said that both men pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit felony copyright infringement. they also pleaded guilty to acting for commercial advantage. the two men are due to be sentenced on 29 april.
us duo in first spam conviction a brother and sister in the us have been convicted of sending hundreds of thousands of unsolicited e-mail messages to aol subscribers.  it is the first criminal prosecution of internet spam distributors. jurors in virginia recommended that the man  jeremy jaynes  serve nine years in prison and that his sister  jessica degroot  be fined $7 500. they were convicted under a state law that bars the sending of bulk e-mails using fake addresses.  they will be formally sentenced next year. a third defendant  richard rutkowski  was acquitted. prosecutors said jaynes was  a snake oil salesman in a new format   using the internet to peddle useless wares  news agency associated press reported. a  fed-ex refund processor  was supposed to allow people to earn $75 an hour working from home. another item on sale was an  internet history eraser . his sister helped him process credit card payments. jaynes amassed a fortune of $24m from his sales  prosecutors said.  he s been successful ripping people off all these years   ap quoted prosecutor russell mcguire as saying. jaynes was also found guilty of breaking a state law which prohibits the sending of more than 100 000 e-mails in 30 days  virginia state attorney general jerry kilgore reportedly said. prosecutors had asked for 15 years in jail for jaynes  and a jail term for his sister. but jaynes  lawyer david oblon called the nine-year recommended term  outrageous  and said his client believed he was innocent. he pointed out that all three of the accused lived in north carolina and were unaware of the virginia state law. spam messages are estimated to account for at least 60% of all e-mails sent.
mobiles  not media players yet  mobiles are not yet ready to be all-singing  all-dancing multimedia devices which will replace portable media players  say two reports.  despite moves to bring music download services to mobiles  people do not want to trade multimedia services with size and battery life  said jupiter. a separate study by gartner has also said real-time tv broadcasts to mobiles is  unlikely  in europe until 2007. technical issues and standards must be resolved first  said the report. batteries already have to cope with other services that operators offer  like video playback  video messaging  megapixel cameras and games amongst others. bringing music download services based on the success of computer-based download services will put more demands on battery life.  fifty percent of europeans said the size of a mobile was the most important factor when it came to choosing their phone  but more power demands tend to mean larger handsets.  mobile phone music services must not be positioned to compete with the pc music experience as the handsets are not yet ready   said thomas husson  mobile analyst at jupiter research.  mobile music services should be new and different  and enable operators to differentiate their brands and support third generation network launches.  other problems facing mobile music include limited storage on phones  compared to portable players which can hold up to 40gb of music. the mobile industry is keen to get into music downloading  after the success of apple s itunes  napster and other net music download services.  with phones getting smarter and more powerful  there are also demands to be able to watch tv on the move. in the us  services like tivo to go let people transfer pre-recorded tv content onto their phones. but  the gartner report on mobile tv broadcasting in europe suggests direct broadcasting will have to wait. currently  tv-like services  where clips are downloaded  are offered by several european operators  like italy s tim and 3. mobile tv will have to overcome several barriers before it is widely taken up though  said the report.  various standards and ways of getting tv signals to mobiles are being worked on globally. in europe  trials in berlin and helsinki are making use of terrestrial tv masts to broadcast compressed signals to handsets with extra receivers. a service from the norwegian broadcasting corporation lets people watch tv programmes on their mobiles 24 hours a day. the service uses 3gp technology  one of the standards for mobile tv. but at the end of 2004  the european telecommunications institute (etsi) formally adopted digital video broadcasting handheld (dvb-h) as the mobile tv broadcasting standard for europe. operators will be working on the standard as a way to bring real-time broadcasts to mobiles  as well as trying to overcome several other barriers. the cost and infrastructure needs to set up the services will need to be addressed. handsets also need to be able to work with the dvb-h standard. tv services will have to live up to the expectations of the digital tv generation too  which expects good quality images at low prices  according to analysts. people are also likely to be put off watching tv on such small screens  said gartner. digital video recorders  like europe s sky+ box  and video-on-demand services mean people have much more control over what tv they watch. as a result  people may see broadcasting straight to mobiles as taking away that control. more powerful smartphones like the xda ii  nokia 6600  sonyericsson p900 and the orange e200  offering web access  text and multimedia messaging  e-mail  calendar and gaming are becoming increasingly common. a report by analysts instat/mdr has predicted that smartphone shipments will grow by 44% over the next five years. it says that smartphones will make up 117 million out of 833 million handsets shipped globally by 2009.
cabs collect mountain of mobiles gadgets are cheaper  smaller and more common than ever. but that just means we are more likely to lose them.  in london alone over the past six months more than 63 000 mobile phones have been left in the back of black cabs  according to a survey. that works out at about three phones per cab. over the same period almost 5 000 laptops and 5 800 pdas such as palms and pocket pcs were left in licensed cabs. even the great and good are not immune to losing their beloved gadgets. jemima khan reportedly left her ipod  phone and purse in a cab and asked for them to be returned to her friend who turned out to be hugh grant. as the popularity of portable gadgets has grown  and we trust more of our lives to them  we seem to be forgetting them in ever larger numbers. the numbers of lost laptops has leapt by 71% in the last three years.  this has left londoners  or those travelling by cab in the capital  as the world s best at losing laptops  according to the research by the licensed taxi drivers association and pointsec  a mobile-data backup firm. more than twice as many laptops were left in the back of black cabs in london as in any of the nine other cities (helsinki  oslo  munich  paris  stockholm  copenhagen  chicago and sydney) where the research into lost and found gadgets was carried out. by contrast danes were most adept at losing mobile phones being seven times more likely to leave it behind in a cab than travellers in germans  norwegians and swedes. top of the range phones can carry enormous amounts of data - enough to hold hundreds of pictures or thousands of contact details. given that few people back up the data on their pc it is a fair bet that even fewer do so with the phone they carry around. you could be losing a fair chunk of your life in the back of that cab not least because many people collect numbers on their phone that they do not have anywhere else.  equally  phones let you navigate through contacts by name so many people have completely forgotten their friends  numbers and could not reconstruct them if they had to. this growing habit of losing gadgets explains the rise of firms such as retrofone which lets people buy a cheap old-fashioned phone to replace the tiny  shiny expensive one they have just lost. briton s growing love of phones has also led to the creation of the mobile equipment national database that lets you register the unique id number of your phone so it can be returned to you in the event of it being lost or stolen. according to statistics 50% of all muggings and snatch theft offences involve mobiles. millions of gadgets are now logged in the database and organisations such as transport for london regularly consult it when trying to re-unite folk with their phones and other gadgets. for the drivers  finding a mobile in the back of their cab is one of the more pleasant things many have found. the survey of what else has been left behind included a harp  a dog  a hamster and a baby.
china net cafe culture crackdown chinese authorities closed 12 575 net cafes in the closing months of 2004  the country s government said.  according to the official news agency most of the net cafes were closed down because they were operating illegally. chinese net cafes operate under a set of strict guidelines and many of those most recently closed broke rules that limit how close they can be to schools. the move is the latest in a series of steps the chinese government has taken to crack down on what it considers to be immoral net use.  the official xinhua news agency said the crackdown was carried out to create a  safer environment for young people in china . rules introduced in 2002 demand that net cafes be at least 200 metres away from middle and elementary schools. the hours that children can use net cafes are also tightly regulated. china has long been worried that net cafes are an unhealthy influence on young people. the 12 575 cafes were shut in the three months from october to december. china also tries to dictate the types of computer games people can play to limit the amount of violence people are exposed to.  net cafes are hugely popular in china because the relatively high cost of computer hardware means that few people have pcs in their homes. this is not the first time that the chinese government has moved against net cafes that are not operating within its strict guidelines. all the 100 000 or so net cafes in the country are required to use software that controls what websites users can see. logs of sites people visit are also kept. laws on net cafe opening hours and who can use them were introduced in 2002 following a fire at one cafe that killed 25 people. during the crackdown following the blaze authorities moved to clean up net cafes and demanded that all of them get permits to operate. in august 2004 chinese authorities shut down 700 websites and arrested 224 people in a crackdown on net porn. at the same time it introduced new controls to block overseas sex sites. the reporters without borders group said in a report that chinese government technologies for e-mail interception and net censorship are among the most highly developed in the world.
bbc leads interactive bafta wins the bbc and the national theatre have led the field at this year s interactive bafta awards.  the national theatre s stagework website picked up the prize for best learning as well as top factual site. the bbc collected three awards  including best online entertainment for the hitchhiker s guide to the galaxy adventure game. spooks interactive took the best interactive tv prize. the annual awards recognise the best in digital media. bbc sport interactive fought off competition from cbbc newsround and the guardian to take home the best news and sport trophy for its coverage of england s exit from euro 2004. it was recognised for its  groundbreaking  use of animation. bafta s grant dean  chair of bafta s interactive entertainment committee  said all the entrants had been of  outstanding quality  and that judging had been  enormously difficult .  without a doubt  2005 has been a landmark year for the bafta interactive awards   he added.   many of the top awards this year have gone to the companies we most commonly associate with traditional entertainment  showing how the gap between new media  film and television is closing.   awards were given out in 12 different categories  including interactive tv  film  music  design  as well as technical and social innovation  at a london ceremony. the top music award was given to sseyo minimixa  a mobile music sequencer designed to let people write  edit and share compositions. warner bros was given two prizes for its  inspiring  efforts in film and dvd interactivity. the chaplin collection beat oasis  really bend it like beckham  shaun of the dead and the day today in the dvd category  and trauma won best film. elsewhere  fashionista and clothes designer alexander mcqueen took the accolade for the best-designed website. the awards have been running since 1997  but in 2002 the british academy of film and television decided to split them into separate games and interactive ceremonies. on tuesday half-life 2 dominated the games prizes. it collected six baftas  including best game and best online game.
mobiles get set for visual radio the growth in the mobile phone market in the past decade has been nothing less than astonishing  but the ability to communicate on the go is not the only reason we are hooked. games  cameras and music players have all been added to our handsets in the last few years  but 2005 could see another big innovation that won t just see a change in our mobile phone habits - it might alter the way we listen to the radio. finnish handset giant nokia has been working on a technology called visual radio  which takes an existing fm signal from a radio station and enables that station to add enhancements such as information and pictures. it is not the first time that such an idea has been suggested - the early days of dab digital radio had similar intentions that never really saw the light of day.  one problem is that the name visual radio leads people to think of television but reidar wasenius  a senior project manager at nokia  was adamant that visual radio should not be confused with the more traditional medium. he said:  i m very happy to say it s not television  what we re talking about is an enhancement of radio as we know it today.  if you have a visual radio enabled handset  when you hear an artist you don t know  or there s a competition or vote that you d like to participate in  you pull out your handset and with one click you turn on a visual channel parallel to the on-air broadcast you ve just been listening to.   that visual channel is run from a computer within the radio station  and sends out different kinds of information to the handset depending on what you are listening to. as well as details on the track or artist of a particular song  there is also the ability to interact immediately with the radio station itself  in a similar way to digital television s  red button  content.  possible interactive content includes competitions  votes and even the chance to rate the song that is playing. but the interactive aspect will make the service especially attractive to radio stations  who will be able to track the number of people taking part in such activities on a real-time basis. this in turn should lead to an additional source of revenue  as it is very likely that advertisers will be keen to exploit new opportunities to reach listeners.  as the visual radio content is transmitted by existing gprs technology you would need to have that service enabled by your network. and there will be a cost for the service as well  although it may depend on your usage.  if you enjoy the visual channel occasionally and interact it ll be two or three pounds per month   said mr wasenius.  but typically what we see happening is the operator offering a package deal for an  all you can eat  arrangement per month.  the payment system could therefore be similar to the way that broadband internet works versus dial-up connections. one thing that is for sure - assuming that nokia retains its market share in handsets  it is estimating that there will be 100 million visual radio-enabled mobile phones in circulation by the end of 2006.  basically  visual radio is not really revolutionary  but rather an evolution where we are providing tools with which people can participate in radio much more easily than ever before.   the first visual radio service in the uk will begin in a few months time with virgin radio  who are positive about the impact it could have on their listeners. station manager steve taylor commented:  listeners can interact with the radio station in a new way.  not only does this give listeners more information on the music we play but means they can instantly purchase things they like; mp3 music downloads and the latest gig tickets.  initially visual radio functionality will be limited to two nokia handsets due out soon - the 3230 and 7710 - but if successful  it is very likely that other manufacturers will want to join them.  listen again to the interview on the radio five live website.
no re-draft  for eu patent law a proposed european law on software patents will not be re-drafted by the european commission (ec) despite requests by meps.  the law is proving controversial and has been in limbo for a year. some major tech firms say it is needed to protect inventions  while others fear it will hurt smaller tech firms. the ec says the council of ministers will adopt a draft version that was agreed upon last may but said it would review  all aspects of the directive . the directive is intended to offer patent protection to inventions that use software to achieve their effect  in other words   computer implemented invention .  in a letter  ec president jos&#233; manuel barroso told the president of the european parliament  josep borrell  that the commission  did not intend to refer a new proposal to the parliament and the council (of ministers)  as it had supported the agreement reached by ministers in may 2004.  if the european council agrees on the draft directive it will then return for a second reading at the european parliament. but that will not guarantee that the directive will become law - instead it will probably mean further delays and controversy over the directive. most eu legislation now needs the approval of both parliament and the council of ministers before it becomes law. french green mep alain lipietz warned two weeks ago that if the commission ignored the parliament s request it would be an  insult  to the assembly. he said that the parliament would then reject the council s version of the legislation as part of the final or conciliation stage of the decision procedure. in the us  the patenting of computer programs and internet business methods is permitted.  this means that the us-based amazon.com holds a patent for its  one-click shopping  service  for example. critics are concerned that the directive could lead to a similar model happening in europe. this  they fear  could hurt small software developers because they do not have the legal and financial might of larger companies if they had to fight patent legal action in court. supporters say current laws are inefficient and it would serve to even up a playing field without bringing eu laws in line with the us.
video phone help for deaf people deaf people who prefer to communicate using british sign language (bsl) could soon be having their phone conversations relayed using webcams or videophones and an interpreter.  the video relay service is being piloted by the royal national institute for deaf people (rnid)  but the organisation says unless the service is provided at the same rate as voice calls it will be beyond most people s pockets. the rnid is urging telecoms regulator  ofcom  to reduce the cost of the service from the current £7.00 per minute and make it the same as ordinary phone calls. the service works by putting a deaf person in visual contact with a bsl interpreter via a webcam or video phone  and the interpreter then relays the deaf person s conversation using a telephone and translates the other person s response into sign language.  for many deaf people  especially those born deaf  bsl is a first and preferred means of communication.  until now  the only alternative has been to use textphones which means having to type a message and have it relayed via an operator.  in the past  i ve used textphones but they have problems   said robert currington who is taking part in the pilot.  i communicate in bsl; my written english is not very good and it takes me longer to think in english and type my message.   i sometimes find it difficult to understand the reply.  the rnid says the uk is lagging behind other countries which are already making relay services available at the cost of an ordinary phone call.  there are no technical or economic reasons for not providing equivalent access to services for deaf people   said rnid technology director  guido gybels.  in the us and australia  sign language relay services have already been made universally available at the same cost as a voice call.  by failing to provide and fund the video relay service for sign language users  the telecommunications sector is effectively discriminating against an already disenfranchised group.   ofcom says it has plans to review the services that telecoms companies are obliged to provide early next year. and new technology  including the video relay service  will be discussed with interested parties in the near future. but a spokesman said its powers were limited by legislation.  any proposals to extend existing arrangements to cover new services would be for government to consider   he said. mr currington  like many of the uk s 70 000 bsl users  will be hoping that a way can be found to make a cost-effective service available.  the relay service makes phone conversations a pleasure   he said.  i can show my emotions more easily in bsl in the same way hearing people express emotions through voice calls.
robots learn  robotiquette  rules robots are learning lessons on  robotiquette  - how to behave socially - so they can mix better with humans.  by playing games  like pass-the-parcel  a university of hertfordshire team is finding out how future robot companions should react in social situations. the study s findings will eventually help humans develop a code of social behaviour in human-robot interaction. the work is part of the european cogniron robotics project  and was on show at london s science museum.   we are assuming a situation in which a useful human companion robot already exists   said professor kerstin dautenhahn  project leader at hertfordshire.  our mission is to look at how such a robot should be programmed to respect personal spaces of humans.   the research also focuses on human perception of robots  including how they should look  and how a robot can learn new skills by imitating a human demonstrator.  without such studies  you will build robots which might not respect the fact that humans are individuals  have preferences and come from different cultural backgrounds   professor dautenhahn told bbc news online.  and i want robots to treat humans as human beings  and not like other robots   she added.  in most situations  a companion robot will eventually have to deal not only with one person  but also with groups of people. to find out how they would react  the hertfordshire cogniron team taught one robot to play pass-the-parcel with children.  showing off its skills at the science museum  the unnamed robot had to select  approach  and ask different children to pick up a parcel with a gift  moving it arm as a pointer and its camera as an eye. it even used speech to give instructions and play music. however  according to researchers  it will still take many years to build a robot which would make full use of the  robotiquette  for human interaction.  if you think of a robot as a companion for the human being  you can think of 20 years into the future   concluded professor dautenhahn.  it might take even longer because it is very  very hard to develop such a robot.   you can hear more on this story on the bbc world service s go digital programme.
mobile music challenges  ipod age  nokia and microsoft have agreed a deal to work on delivery of music to handsets  while sony ericsson has unveiled its phone walkman and motorola is working on an itunes phone.  can mobile phones replace the mp3 player in your pocket  the music download market has been growing steadily since record firms embraced digital distribution. ease of use  relative low price and increased access to broadband has helped drive the phenomenal growth of mp3 players.  full-length music downloads on mobile phones have not taken off so quickly - held back by technical challenges as well as issues over music availability. but the mobile music industry is confident that the days of dedicated mp3 players are numbered.  gilles babinet  chief executive of mobile music firm musiwave  said:  music downloads on mobiles have the potential to be the biggest-ever medium for music.   musiwave provides downloading infrastructure for the mobile phone market and mr babinet said the industry was enjoying  definite momentum.  but there are hurdles to overcome. mobile phones offer limited storage for music - certainly nothing to rival apple s 60gb ipod. but the first mobile phones with hard disk players will be on the market soon and the current generation of mobiles using flash technology can store up to one gigabyte of music - enough for 250 songs.  we are working in the hard disk area and we will be bringing out exciting devices   jonas guest  vice president for entertainment at nokia  told the bbc news website. but will mobiles become mere storage devices   one of the problems we could have is that mobiles are used just for storage and playback while pcs are used for downloading   said mr babinet   we don t want people to cast aside their pcs - we want mobile users to hook up into the existing ecosystems   explained mr guest.  you must enable people to transfer music from a pc to a handset and vice versa.   one of the key elements of the nokia and microsoft deal is the agreed ability to transfer songs between a handset and a pc. microsoft will adopt open standards allowing music to cross boundaries for the first time. songs can be downloaded on pc or mobile and transferred between the platforms.  the line between online and wireless is going to blur   predicted ted cohen  senior vice president of digital development and distribution at emi. he said:  the market is more regional in its maturity. in asia it is beyond belief.  the majority of our digital revenues in asia comes from mobiles. in north america it is fixed line while there is equilibrium in europe.   emi currently offers its entire 200 000 download catalogue for use by both by pcs and mobile phones. mr cohen said:  it s going to be just as important to connect through 3g or wireless as it is through your pc.  we want music to be a continuum.  the seamless experience of mobiles and pc downloads is approaching  he predicted. mr babinet said the mobile phone had a number of advantages over pcs which would see it become the focus for music downloading in the future.  getting music from your pc onto a device is not an easy experience. you have to switch the pc on  load the operating system  load the program  buy the music  download the music  and then transfer the music.  all of these steps can be done in one step on a mobile phone.  he said the mobile phone s billing system would make it easier for teenagers to embrace downloads  because pre-paid cards were already accepted by the age group.   certainly  we have a problem with battery  memory and bandwidth. but it s not about the current status. it s about the potential.  you will have all of your music on your mobile.  all three men said that the social interaction of mobile music would drive the market. mr cohen said:  i can send you the song and it is either billed to me or i send it to you and if you listen to it and want to keep  it is billed to you.  it s a social phenomenon.  mr babinet said:  today you use radio and tv to discover music. tomorrow you will discover and consume music via one device - the mobile.
be careful how you code a new european directive could put software writers at risk of legal action  warns former programmer and technology analyst bill thompson.  if it gets its way  the dutch government will conclude its presidency of the european union by pushing through a controversial measure that has been rejected by the european parliament  lacks majority support from national governments and will leave millions of european citizens in legal limbo and facing the possibility of court cases against them. if the new law was about border controls  defence or even the new constitution  then our tv screens would be full of experts agonising over the impact on our daily lives. sadly for those who will be directly affected  the controversy concerns the patenting of computer programs  a topic that may excite the bloggers  campaigning groups and technical press but does not obsess middle britain. after all  how much fuss can you generate about the directive on the patentability of computer-implemented inventions  and the way it amends article 52 of the 1973 european patent convention  yet if the new directive is nodded through at the next meeting of one of the eu s ministerial councils  as seems likely  it will allow programs to be patented in europe just as they are in the us. many observers of the computing scene  including myself  think the results will be disastrous for small companies  innovative programmers and the free and open source software movement. it will let large companies patent all sorts of ideas and give legal force to those who want to limit their competitors  use of really obvious ideas.  in the us you cannot build a system that stores customer credit card details so that they can pay without having to re-enter them unless amazon lets you  because they hold the patent on  one-click  online purchase. it is a small invention  but amazon made it to the patent office first and now owns it.  we are relatively free from this sort of thing over here  but perhaps not for long. the new proposals go back to 2002  although argument about patentability of software and computer-implemented inventions has been going on since at least the mid-1980s. they have come to a head now after a year in which proposals were made  endorsed by the council of ministers  radically modified by the european parliament and then re-presented in their original form. some national governments seem to be aware of the problems. poland has rejected the proposal and germany s main political parties have opposed it  but there is not enough opposition to guarantee their rejection. early in december the british government held a consultation meeting with those who had commented on the proposals. science minister lord sainsbury went along to listen and outline the uk position  but according to those present  it was embarrassing to see how little the minister and his officials actually understood the issues concerned.  the draft directive is being put through the council as what is called an  a  item and can only be approved or rejected. no discussion or amendment is allowed. so why should we be worried  first  there is the abuse of the democratic process involved in disregarding the views of the parliament and abandoning all of their carefully argued amendments. this goes to the heart of the european project  and even those who do not care about software or patents should be worried. if coders are treated like this today  who is to say that it will not be you tomorrow   more directly  once software patents are granted then any programmer will have to worry that the code they are writing is infringing someone else s patent. this is not about stealing software  as code is already protected by copyright. patents are not copyright  but something much stronger. a patent gives the owner the right to stop anyone else using their invention  even if the other person invented it separately. i have never  to my shame  managed to read lord byron s childe harold s pilgrimage. if it was pointed out that one of my articles contained a substantial chunk of the poem then i could defend myself in court by claiming that i had simply made it up and it was coincidence. the same does not hold for a patent. if i sit down this afternoon and write a brilliant graphics compression routine and it happens to be the same as the lzw algorithm used in gif files  then i am in trouble under patent law  at least in the us. coincidence is no defence. the proposed directive is supported by many of the major software companies  but this is hardly surprising since most of them are us-based and they have already had to cope with a legal environment that allows patents. they have legal departments and  more crucially  patents of their own which they can trade or cross-license with other patent holders.  even this system breaks down  of course  as microsoft found out last year when they initially lost a case brought by eolas which claimed that internet explorer (and other browsers) infringed an eolas patent. that one was eventually thrown out  but only after months of uncertainty and millions of dollars. but small companies  and the free and open software movement do not have any patents to trade. much of the really useful software we use every day  programs like the apache web server  the gnu/linux operating system and the fearsomely popular firefox browser  is developed outside company structures by people who do not have legal departments to check for patent infringements. the damage to software will not happen overnight  of course. if the directive goes through it has to be written into national laws and then there will be a steady stream of legal actions against small companies and open source products. eventually someone will decide to attack linux directly  probably with some secret funding from one or two large players. the new directive will limit innovation by forcing programmers to spend time checking for patent infringements or simply avoiding working in potentially competitive areas. and it will damage europe s computer industry. we can only hope that the council of ministers has the integrity and strength to reject this bad law.  bill thompson is a regular commentator on the bbc world service programme go digital.
first look at playstation 3 chip some details of the chip inside sony s playstation 3 have been revealed.  sony  ibm and toshiba have released limited data about the so-called cell chip that will be able to carry out trillions of calculations per second. the chip will be made of several different processing cores that work on tasks together. the playstation 3 is expected in 2006 but developers are expecting to get prototypes early next year to tune games that will appear on it at launch.  the three firms have been working on the chip since 2001 but before now few details have been released about how it might function. in a joint statement the three firms gave hints about how the chip will work but fuller details will be released in february next year at the international solid state circuits conference in san francisco.  the three firms claim that the cell chip will be up to 10 times more powerful than existing processors. when put inside powerful computer servers  the cell consortium expects it to be capable of handling 16 trillion floating point operations  or calculations  every second. the chip has also been refined to be able to handle the detailed graphics common in games and the data demands of films and broadband media. ibm said it would start producing the chip in early 2005 at manufacturing plants in the us. the first machines off the line using the cell processor will be computer workstations and servers. a working version of the ps3 is due to be shown off in may 2005 but a full launch of the next generation console is not expected to start until 2006. as well as being inside the playstation 3  the chip will also be used inside high-definition tvs and powerful computers.  in the future  all forms of digital content will be converged and fused onto the broadband network   said ken kutaragi  chief operating officer of sony.  current pc architecture is nearing its limits.
wi-fi web reaches farmers in peru a network of community computer centres  linked by wireless technology  is providing a helping hand for poor farmers in peru.  the pilot scheme in the huaral valley  80 kilometres north of the capital lima  aims to offer the 6 000-strong community up-to-date information on agricultural market prices and trends. the agricultural information project for farmers of the chancay-huaral valley also provides vital links between local organisations in charge of water irrigation  enabling them to coordinate their actions. more than 13 000 rural inhabitants  as well as 18 000 students in the region  will also benefit from the telecoms infrastructure.  the 14 telecentres uses only free open source software and affordable computer equipment. the network has been three years in the making and was officially inaugurated in september.  the non-government organisation  cepes (peruvian centre for social studies) led the $200 000 project  also backed by local institutions  the education and agriculture ministries  and european development organisations.  the plan includes training on computers and internet skills for both operators and users of the system   said carlos saldarriaga  technical coordinator at cepes. farmers are also taking extra lessons on how to apply the new information to make the most of their plots of land. the board of irrigation users which runs the computer centres  aims to make the network self-sustainable within three years  through the cash generated by using the telecentres as internet cafes.  one of the key elements of the project is the agricultural information system  with its flagship huaral.org website. there  farmers can find the prices for local produce  as well as information on topics ranging from plague prevention to the latest farming techniques. the system also helps the inhabitants of the chancay-huaral valley to organise their vital irrigation systems.  water is the main element that unites them all. it is a precious element in peru s coastal areas  because it is so scarce  and therefore it is necessary to have proper irrigation systems to make the most of it   mr saldarriaga told the bbc news website. the information network also allows farmers to look beyond their own region  and share experiences with other colleagues from the rest of peru and even around the world.  cepes says the involvement of the farmers has been key in the project s success.  throughout the last three years  the people have provided a vital thrust to the project; they feel it belongs to them   said mr saldarriaga. the community training sessions  attended by an equal number of men and women  have been the perfect showcase for their enthusiasm.  we have had an excellent response  mainly from young people. but we have also had a great feedback when we trained 40 or 50-year old women  who were seeing a computer for the first time in their lives.  so far  the huaral programme promoters say the experience has been very positive  and are already planning on spreading the model among other farmers  organisations in peru.  this is a pilot project  and we have been very keen on its cloning potential in other places   underlined mr saldarriaga.  the cepes researcher recalls what happened in cuyo  a 50-family community with no electricity  during the construction of the local telecentre site. there it was necessary to build a mini-hydraulic dam in order to generate 2kw worth of power for the computers  the communications equipment and the cabin lights.  it was already dark when the technicians realised they didn t have any light bulbs to test the generator  so they turned up to the local store to buy light bulbs   recalls carlos saldarriaga.  the logical answer was  we don t sell any   so they had to wait until the next morning to do the testing.  now  with the wireless network  cuyo as well as the other communities is no longer isolated.
players sought for $1m prize uk gamers are getting a chance to take part in a $1m tournament thanks to one of the country s top teams.  the four-kings clan is staging a pop idol type competition to find new members who can take on the world s best in the lucrative tournament. four-kings hopes the open qualifiers will turn up gamers good enough to beat all comers at the painkiller game. top players also get a contract with the four-kings team which will pay travelling expenses for the contest.  uk gamers have until 12 november to register their interest in taking part and can sign up via the four-kings  jolt.co.uk and painkiller tournament websites. philip wride  who co-manages the four-kings team  said online qualifiers will be held from 16-28 november to find the best eight players of the painkiller game. he said the clan was running the contest because four-kings does not currently have any players that excel at painkiller. these eight players will be brought together in london on 3-5 december for the bloodline tournament that will find the best two players.  the event will be filmed and the final cut made available online for others to watch. the movie is being put together by simon bysshe who has shot many other films about pro-gaming that have been widely shared online. said mr bysshe:  painkiller is a new game and the opportunity is there for a new player to step up.  painkiller has been described as a game that adds a few modern touches  such as improved graphics  to the old-fashioned first-person shooter. these two players will be put forward as the uk s entrants to the cyberathlete professional league $1m painkiller contest that will take place throughout 2005. the event is being billed as the cpl world tour and will be arranged around ten separate tournaments at different locations around the world. travel expenses to all the stops on the tour will be paid by four-kings for the two uk players who make the grade. the top prize at each stop on the world tour will be $15 000. a further $150 000 will be given to the winner of the grand final due to be held in december 2005. mr wride said any gamer that wins a few tour stop tournaments and the grand final will have a very good year. the first stop on the world tour will be istanbul  turkey from 10-13 february. a total of $50 000 in cash prizes is on offer. the cpl has said that it picked a one-on-one game such as painkiller to make it easier for spectators to follow the action. counter-strike  by far the most popular online game  pits teams against each other and can be confusing to follow if those watching are not familiar with the layout of the maps on which it is played. the decision to pick painkiller was greeted with surprise by many gamers  as it was widely expected that doom 3 would be chosen as the one-one-one title.
piero gives rugby perspective bbc sport unveils its new analysis tool piero at the wales v england rugby union match on saturday. but what does it do and how does it work   picture the scene - wales are camped on the england line in the dying seconds of the six nations  opening match. a ball is flung out to winger shane williams who crosses to score the winning try for wales. but the england players are incensed - arguing that the pass was forward and the try should not stand. in the past  sports fans would be left debating the validity of the try for days and weeks to come. but bbc sport s new tool piero could end discussions in minutes.  piero  named after the italian painter and pioneer of perspective piero della francesco  creates a virtual stadium in which virtual players can be tracked from almost any angle. viewers will be able to see precisely how the ball was thrown and by whom  giving a greater depth to the growing wealth of analysis available during sports broadcasts. the technology has been created by bbc research and development for bbc broadcast and bbc outside broadcasts. bbc sport is the first client to start using the system.  in order to keep audiences growing and growing... we need to work closely with people who create technology and innovation to bring sport to life   said andrew thompson  the bbc s head of development  new media and sports news.  we want to appeal to core fans - to give them more analysis  more detail  more definitive answers about key passages of play.  piero works by taking telemetric data from fixed camera positions and sending that data inside the video signal to a pc which can then render the information into 3d graphics.  the more cameras using piero  the better the detail possible out the other end when the data is turned into 3d models.  it allows us to tell the story of a passage of play  tracking individual players across the field  looking at tactics   said andy townsend  from bbc broadcast.  an operator can manipulate the information and provide almost real-time replays of incidents  as well as more in-depth analysis. the  virtual camera  can focus on virtually any aspect of the pitch  giving viewers an insight into action that the camera normally cannot see. piero also provides a wealth of statistical detail - from the length of kicks  to the length of a run of an individual player and the height of a lift at any lineout. mr townsend said sports performance companies were already showing an interest in the technology. bbc broadcast hopes the technology can be sold to third parties interested in using it a number of different ways - from sport broadcasting to entertainment and game shows.
casual gaming to  take off  games aimed at  casual players  are set to be even bigger in 2005  according to industry experts.  easy-to-play titles that do not require too much time and that are playable online or downloadable to mobile devices will see real growth in the coming year. the trend shows that gaming is not just about big-hitting  games console titles  which appeal more to  hardcore  gamers  said a panel of experts. they were speaking before the annual consumer electronics show in las vegas which showcases the latest trends in gadgets and technologies for 2005. the panel also insisted that casual gamers were not just women  a common misconception which pervades current thinking about gamer demographics.  casual games like poker  pool  bridge  bingo and puzzle-based titles  which can be played online or downloaded onto mobile devices  were  gender neutral  and different genres attracted different players.  greg mills  program director at aol  said its figures suggested that sports-based games attracted 90% of 18 to 24-year-old males  while puzzle games were played by 80% of females. games like bridge tended to attract the over-50 demographic of gamers.  but hardcore gamers who are more attracted to blockbuster gamers which usually require hi-spec pcs  like half-life 2  or halo 2 on xbox  also liked to have a different type of gaming experience.  when hardcore gamers are not playing halo  they are playing poker and pool  based on our research   said geoff graber  director of yahoo games  which attracts about 12 million gamers a month.  with the growth of powerful pc technology and ownership  broadband take-up  portable players and mobile devices  as well as interactive tv  casual gaming is shaping up to be big business in 2005  according to the panel. the focus for the coming year should be about attracting third-party developers into the field to offer more innovative and multiplayer titles  they agreed.  we are at a time where we are on the verge of something much bigger   said mr graber.  casual games will get into their stride in 2005  will be really big in 2006 and will be about community.  with more people finding more to do with their gadgets and high-speed connections  casual games would start to open up the world of gaming as a form of mass-market entertainment to more people. key to these types of titles is the chance they give people who may not see themselves as gamers to dip in and out of games when they liked.  portal sites which offer casual games  like aol  yahoo  and realarcade  as well as other games-on-demand services  allow people to build up buddy lists so they can return and play against the same people. this aspect of  community  is crucial for gamers who just want to have quick access to free or cheap games without committing long periods of time immersed in £30 to £40 console or pc titles  said the panel. about 120 000 people are expected to attend the ces trade show which stretches over more than 1.5 million square feet and which officially runs from 6 to 9 january. the main theme is how new devices are getting better at talking to each other  allowing people to enjoy digital content  like audio  video and images  when they want  and where they want.
microsoft gets the blogging bug software giant microsoft is taking the plunge into the world of blogging.  it is launching a test service to allow people to publish blogs  or online journals  called msn spaces. microsoft is trailing behind competitors like google and aol  which already offer services which make it easy for people to set up web journals. blogs  short for web logs  have become a popular way for people to talk about their lives and express opinions online.  msn spaces is free to anyone with a hotmail or msn messenger account. people will be able to choose a layout for the page  upload images and share photo albums and music playlists. the service will be supported by banner ads.  this is a simple tool for people to express themselves   said msn s blake irving. this is microsoft s first foray into blogging  which has taken off as a web phenomenon in the past year. competitors like google already offer free services through its blogger site  while aol provides its members with journals. accurate figures for the number of blogs in existence are hard to come by. according to blog analysis firm technorati  the so-called blogosphere  has doubled every five and a half months for the last 18 months. it now estimates that the number of blogs in existence has exceeded 4.8 million  although some speculate that less than a quarter are regularly maintained.
broadband challenges tv viewing the number of europeans with broadband has exploded over the past 12 months  with the web eating into tv viewing habits  research suggests.  just over 54 million people are hooked up to the net via broadband  up from 34 million a year ago  according to market analysts nielsen/netratings. the total number of people online in europe has broken the 100 million mark. the popularity of the net has meant that many are turning away from tv  say analysts jupiter research. it found that a quarter of web users said they spent less time watching tv in favour of the net  the report by nielsen/netratings found that the number of people with fast internet access had risen by 60% over the past year.  the biggest jump was in italy  where it rose by 120%. britain was close behind  with broadband users almost doubling in a year. the growth has been fuelled by lower prices and a wider choice of always-on  fast-net subscription plans.  twelve months ago high speed internet users made up just over one third of the audience in europe; now they are more than 50% and we expect this number to keep growing   said gabrielle prior  nielsen/netratings analyst.  as the number of high-speed surfers grows  websites will need to adapt  update and enhance their content to retain their visitors and encourage new ones.  the total number of europeans online rose by 12% to 100 million over the past year  the report showed  with the biggest rise in france  italy  britain and germany.  the ability to browse web pages at high speed  download files such as music or films and play online games is changing what people do in their spare time.  a study by analysts jupiter research suggested that broadband was challenging television viewing habits. in homes with broadband  40% said they were spending less time watching tv. the threat to tv was greatest in countries where broadband was on the up  in particular the uk  france and spain  said the report. it said tv companies faced a major long-term threat over the next five years  with broadband predicted to grow from 19% to 37% of households by 2009.  year-on-year we are continuing to see a seismic shift in where  when and how europe s population consume media for information and entertainment and this has big implications for tv  newspaper and radio   said jupiter research analyst olivier beauvillian.
call for action on internet scam phone companies are not doing enough to warn customers about internet  rogue-dialling  scams  according to premium phone line regulator icstis.  it has received 45 000 complaints in recent months about dial-up internet connections diverting to premium rate numbers without users  knowledge. phone companies refuse to pay compensation because they say calls must be paid for. they must warn people earlier about possible fraud  icstis said.  people who use dial-up connections can be affected by the scams. without realising  a program can be downloaded which diverts internet calls via a premium phone line. victims often fail to notice until they receive an unusually high bill. icstis spokesman rob dwight said:  phone companies should get in touch with their customers sooner.  if my bill goes over the usual £50 a month i want to know about it straight away - i don t want to be told when it s hit £750.   phone companies had the systems in place to spot fraudulent activity and artificially-inflated traffic  he said.  we alert them to the numbers that we have under investigation and they should be looking out for these numbers   he added.  telecoms ombudsman elizabeth france said:  certainly i would not be surprised to find my credit card company phoning me if i do something out of the ordinary.  so i would expect phone companies to be looking to see if they can have a similar approach.  the biggest phone company bt says it is doing what it can to monitor fraud and warn people about rogue dialling. its advice to customers is to use call barring if they want to prevent calls to premium lines because  under the current system  once the call has been made there s little that can be done.  gavin patterson  group managing director for bt consumer  said  we do look at customer s calling patterns and we do make interventions when they are out of the ordinary.  we re looking at the moment at whether we can improve this.  but as bt handled 180 million calls a day monitoring was  quite a task in itself   he added. the government has ordered a review of premium line services and is likely to say icstis should have more power to deal with rogue diallers in future. at the moment  it cannot demand pay-outs on the behalf of customer - it can only close illegal services down.  i use free anti-virus software (avg) and free firewall protection (zonealarm). both of these tools have prevented unauthorised access and outgoing calls inadvertently and innocently caused by my daughter s love of music sites. how about isps informing all customers of such facilities  the responsibility clearly falls with the customer but many fall prey through simply not knowing how to avoid these issues.  ignorance is and always has been an expensive business.  does any one know what happens once this fraud has been committed and recognised  the phone companies pay the people who obtaining money fraudulently  so are these people followed up and prosecuted    these diallers are mainly downloaded from sites offering illegal mp3s  porn and pirated software. if people didn t visit such sites they d be considerably less at risk. whatever happened to personal responsibility  it seems everyone has to be a  victim  these days!  part of the blame has to rest with the manufacturers of home computer operating systems. a secure system should not allow a web page or email to download and install anything without the user s knowledge.  these scams are illegal and telephone companies should have nothing to do with them. they should refuse to pay money over to the perpetrators. or are they themselves receiving such good returns that it is in their interest to keep the scam going   why don t bt et al block all premium numbers by default and only turn it off at the customer s request  to anyone who falls foul of this scam - refuse to pay your telephone provider for these calls. after you notify your telephone provider of these fraudulent transactions  they cannot insist on you paying the bill. to do so would be to knowingly assist the fraudsters to commit the fraud. no customers have yet been taken to court for refusing to pay these bills.  disable or remove your modem and use broadband instead - then you have nothing to worry about. or buy some decent firewall software and anti-virus. you would not walk out in the freezing cold without a coat - you would not drive your car without any insurance - so why not protect your pc  stop blaming the phone companies - it s not their fault!  i was very impressed with our phone company recently. i had kept ringing a hotline number for kylie tickets and next day they rang back to ask if i was aware there were 40-odd calls to the same number. great service. and i got the tickets as well!  i have a colleague who has fallen victim to this kind of scam. he informed the phone company about it  they subsequently put a block on premium rate numbers. three months later another huge bill of over £1 000 came in - the block apparently didn t work and he still has to pay for it  even though a block was in place. phone companies are probably quite happy for their customers to be hit with a huge bill  otherwise they d be taking extra steps to prevent this kind of problem.  i have been scammed of £139. the operator will do nothing about this and  to add insult to injury  i was charged vat by the government.  premium rate numbers have been subject to various scams ever since they were invented. one example was where thieves would set up a premium rate number and then dial it day and night from phones whose quarterly bills were never paid. the telephone company was the victim here and you can bet that loophole was blocked very quickly.  i know people who have run up large bills  despite being it-literate. from talking to bt in belfast  i believe that they will shortly be giving out a free application that can stop you dialling expensive numbers without knowing. it s not the fault of phone companies  and at last they are doing something about it.  it s about time that the profiteering by the  legitimate  phone companies came to an end  mainly by doing away with dial-up altogether and bring broadband down to the same price as dial-up! not only will this ruin things for the dialler scammers but also allow people to update and upgrade their security more easily and quickly.  i haven t  fallen victim to a rogue-dialling scam  but i think you re seriously remiss in not pointing out that the vast majority of these scams arise from people trying to access services purporting to provide free pornography. in most cases the user is entirely at fault  which is probably why the telephone companies are rightly unwilling to refund them.  my telephone supplier did not inform me that my monthly bill had risen from its normal £3 to £5  to £320. this was because of the scam. they simply billed me. what particularly galls me  over and above having over £300 stolen  is that the supplier and the government (through vat) are profiting from this crime and will not reimburse me their portion of my losses.  how about an automatic monthly cap of say £20 on premium rate calls that you would have to contact your provider to have lifted  that way you could use legitimate premium rate numbers while limiting fraudulent usage. at least any disputed amount would be limited  far easier for a telecoms operator to write off £20 than it is £750.  a few years back i was also the target of such scams but thank god i have already upgraded to broadband and nothing was connected to my modem so all i heard was the sound of an attempted connection.  how about home users take some responsibility and ensure their anti-virus and firewall software is up to date  that should prevent the vast majority of these scams.
lifestyle  governs mobile choice  faster  better or funkier hardware alone is not going to help phone firms sell more handsets  research suggests.  instead  phone firms keen to get more out of their customers should not just be pushing the technology for its own sake. consumers are far more interested in how handsets fit in with their lifestyle than they are in screen size  onboard memory or the chip inside  shows an in-depth study by telecommunications company ericsson.  historically in the industry there has been too much focus on using technology   said dr michael bjorn  senior advisor on mobile media at ericsson s consumer and enterprise lab.  we have to stop saying that these technologies will change their lives   he said.  we should try to speak to consumers in their own language and help them see how it fits in with what they are doing   he told the bbc news website.  for the study  ericsson interviewed 14 000 mobile phone owners on the ways they use their phone.  people s habits remain the same   said dr bjorn.  they just move the activity into the mobile phone as it s a much more convenient way to do it.   one good example of this was diary-writing among younger people  he said. while diaries have always been popular  a mobile phone -- especially one equipped with a camera -- helps them keep it in a different form. youngsters  use of text messages also reflects their desire to chat and keep in contact with friends and again just lets them do it in a slightly changed way. dr bjorn said that although consumers do what they always did but use a phone to do it  the sheer variety of what the new handset technologies make possible does gradually drive new habits and lifestyles. ericsson s research has shown that consumers divide into different  tribes  that use phones in different ways. dr bjorn said groups dubbed  pioneers  and  materialists  were most interested in trying new things and were behind the start of many trends in phone use.  for instance   he said   older people are using sms much more than they did five years ago.  this was because younger users  often the children of ageing mobile owners  encouraged older people to try it so they could keep in touch.  another factor governing the speed of change in mobile phone use was the simple speed with which new devices are bought by pioneers and materialists. only when about 25% of people have handsets with new innovations on them  such as cameras  can consumers stop worrying that if they send a picture message the person at the other end will be able to see it.  once this significant number of users is passed  use of new innovations tends to take off. dr bjorn said that early reports of camera phone usage in japan seemed to imply that the innovation was going to be a flop. however  he said  now 45% of the japanese people ericsson questioned use their camera phone at least once a month. in 2003 the figure was 29%. similarly  across europe the numbers of people taking snaps with cameras is starting to rise. in 2003 only 4% of the people in the uk took a phonecam snap at least once a month. now the figure is 14%. similar rises have been seen in many other european nations. dr bjorn said that people also used their camera phones in very different ways to film and even digital cameras.  usage patterns for digital cameras are almost exactly replacing usage patterns for analogue cameras   he said. digital cameras tend to be used on significant events such as weddings  holidays and birthdays. by contrast  he said  camera phones were being used much more to capture a moment and were being woven into everyday life.
honour for uk games maker leading british computer games maker peter molyneux has been made an obe in the new year honours list.  the head of surrey s lionhead studios was granted the honour for services to the computer games industry. mr molyneux has been behind many of the ground-breaking games of the last 15 years such as populous  theme park  dungeon keeper and black and white. he is widely credited with helping to create and popularise the so-called god-game genre.  speaking to the bbc news website mr molyneux said receiving the honour was something of a surprise. it s come completely out of the blue   he said   i never would have guessed that i d have that kind of honour.  he said he was surprised as much because  not too long ago  many people thought computer gaming was a fad.   it was thought to be like skateboarding   he said   a craze that everyone thought would go away.  now  he said  the gaming world rivals the movie industry for sales and cultural influence.  britain plays a big part in it   he said.  it s one of the founding nations that made the industry what it is.  mr molyneux has been a pivotal figure in the computer games industry for almost 20 years. his career started at bullfrog studios which in 1987 produced populous one of the first god-games. the title gave players control over the lives a small population of computerised people. mr molyneux said that his involvement with the games industry started almost by accident as back in the early days game making was more a hobby than a career.  i thought everyone would treat populous as weird   he said   but it became a huge international success.  he left bullfrog in 1997 to set up lionhead studios which was behind the ambitous and widely acclaimed game black & white. one of the next titles to come from lionhead puts players in charge of a movie studio and tasks them with producing and directing a hit film. the veteran game maker says he has one problem still to solve.  being an absolute geek i ve got no idea what i m going to wear when i go and pick it up   he said.
google to scan famous libraries the libraries of five of the world s most important academic institutions are to be digitised by google.  scanned pages from books in the public domain will then be made available for search and reading online. the full libraries of michigan and stanford universities  as well as archives at harvard  oxford and the new york public library are included. online pages from scanned books will not have adverts but will have links to online store amazon  google said.   the goal of the project is to unlock the wealth of information that is offline and bring it online   said susan wojcicki  director of product management at google.  there will also be links to public libraries so that the books can be borrowed. google will not be paid for providing for the links. it will take six years to digitise the full collection at michigan  which contains seven million volumes. users will only have access to extracts and bibliographies of copyrighted works. the new york library is allowing google to include a small portion of books no longer covered by copyright.  harvard is limiting its participation to 40 000 books  while oxford wants google to scan books originally published in the 19th century and held in the bodleian library. a spokeswoman for oxford university said the digitised books would include novels  poetry  political tracts and art books.  important works that are out of print or only available in a few libraries around the world will be made available to everyone   she said. about one million books will be scanned by google  less than 15% of the total collection held in the bodleian.  we hope that oxford s contribution to this project will be of scholarly use  as well as general interest  to people around the world   said reg carr  director of oxford university library services.   it s a significant opportunity to bring our material to the rest of the world   said paul leclerc  president of the new york public library.  it could solve an old problem: if people can t get to us  how can we get to them    this is the day the world changes   said john wilkin  a university of michigan librarian working with google.  it will be disruptive because some people will worry that this is the beginning of the end of libraries.  but this is something we have to do to revitalise the profession and make it more meaningful.
blind student  hears in colour  a blind student has developed software that turns colours into musical notes so that he can read weather maps.  victor wong  a graduate student from hong kong studying at cornell university in new york state  had to read coloured maps of the upper atmosphere as part of his research. to study  space weather  mr wong needed to explore minute fluctuations in order to create mathematical models. a number of solutions were tried  including having a colleague describe the maps and attempting to print them in braille. mr wong eventually hit upon the idea of translating individual colours into music  and enlisted the help of a computer graphics specialist and another student to do the programming work.   the images have three dimensions and i had to find a way of reading them myself   mr wong told the bbc news website.  for the sake of my own study - and for the sake of blind scientists generally - i felt it would be good to develop software that could help us to read colour images.  he tried a prototype version of the software to explore a photograph of a parrot. in order to have an exact reference to the screen  a pen and tablet device is used. the software then assigns one of 88 piano notes to individually coloured pixels - ranging from blue at the lower end of this scale to red at the upper end. mr wong says the application is still very much in its infancy and is only useful for reading images that have been created digitally.  if i took a random picture and scanned it and then used my software to recognise it  it wouldn t work that well.   mr wong has been blind from the age of seven and he thinks that having a  colour memory  makes the software more useful than it would be to a scientist who had never had any vision.  as the notes increase in pitch i know the colour s getting redder and redder  and in my mind s eye a patch of red appears.  the colour to music software has not yet been made available commercially  and mr wong believes that several people would have to work together to make it viable. but he hopes that one day it can be developed to give blind people access to photographs and other images.
mobile games come of age the bbc news website takes a look at how games on mobile phones are maturing. a brief round-up follows but you can skip straight to the reviews by clicking on the links below.  if you think of snake when some mentions  mobile games  then you could be in for a bit of a surprise. this is because mobile games have come a long way in a very short time. even before nokia s n-gage game phone launched in late 2003  many mobile operators were realising that there was an audience looking for something to play on their handset.  and given that many more people own handsets than own portable game playing gadgets such as the gameboy it could be a very lucrative market. that audience includes commuters wanting something to fill their time on the way home  game fans looking for a bit of variety and hard core gamers who like to play every moment they can. life for all these types of player has got immeasurably better in the last year as the numbers of titles you can download to your phone has snowballed. now sites such as wireless gaming review list more than 200 different titles for some uk networks and the ranges suit every possible taste. there are ports of pc and arcade classics such as space invaders  lunar lander and bejewelled. there are also versions of titles  such as colin mcrae rally  that you typically find on pcs and consoles.  there are shoot-em-ups  adventure games  strategy titles and many novel games only found on handsets. rarely now does an action movie launch without a mobile game tie-in. increasingly such launches are all part of the promotional campaign for a film  understandable when you realise that a good game can rack up millions of downloads. the returns can be pretty good when you consider that some games cost £5. what has also helped games on mobiles thrive is the fact that it is easier than ever to get hold of them thanks to technology known as wap push. by sending a text message to a game maker you can have the title downloaded to your handset. far better than having to navigate through the menus of most mobile operator portals. the number of handsets that can play games has grown hugely too. almost half of all phones now have java onboard meaning that they can play the increasingly sophisticated games that are available - even the ones that use 3d graphics.  the minimum technology specifications that phones should adhere to are getting more sophisticated which means that games are too. now double key presses are possible making familiar tactics such as moving and strafing a real option. the processing power on handsets means that physics on mobile games is getting more convincing and the graphics are improving too. some game makers are also starting to take advantage of the extra capabilities in a mobile. many titles  particularly racing games  let you upload your best time to see how you compare to others. usually you can get hold of their best time and race against a  ghost  or  shadow  to see if you can beat them. a few games also let you take on people in real time via the network or  if you are sitting close to them  via bluetooth short-range radio technology. with so much going on it is hard to do justice to the sheer diversity of what is happening. but these two features should help point you in the direction of the game makers and give you an idea of where to look and how to get playing.   too fast too furious (digital bridges)   as soon as i start playing this i remember why i never play driving games - because i m rubbish at them. no matter if i drive the car via joystick or keypad i just cannot get the hang of braking for corners or timing a rush to pass other drivers. the game rewards replay because to advance you have to complete every section within a time limit. winning gives you cash for upgrades. graphically the rolling road is a convincing enough evocation of speed as the palm trees and cactus whip by and the city scrolls past in the background. the cars handle pretty well despite my uselessness but it was not clear if the different models of cars were appreciably different on the track. the only niggle was that the interface was a bit confusing especially when using a joystick rather than the keypad to play.   fatal force (macrospace)   a futuristic shooter that lets you either play various deathmatch modes against your phone or run through a series of scenarios that involves killing aliens invading earth. graphics are a bit cartoon-like but only helps to make clear what is going on and levels are well laid out and encourage you to leap about exploring. both background music and sounds effects work well. the scenarios are well scripted and you regularly get hints from the fatal force commanders. weapons include flamethrowers  rocket launchers  grenades and at a couple of points you even get chance to use a mech for a short while. with the right power-up you can go into a matrix-style bullet time to cope with the onslaught of aliens. the game lets you play via bluetooth if others are in range. online the game has quite a following with clans  player rankings and even new downloadable maps.
domain system scam fear a system to make it easier to create website addresses using alphabets like cyrillic could open a back door for scammers  a trade body has warned.  the internationalised domain names system has been a work in progress for years and has recently been approved by the internet electronic task force. but the uk internet forum (ukif) is concerned that the system will let scammers create fake sites more easily. the problem lies in the computer codes used to represent language.  registering names that look like that of legitimate companies but lead users to fake sites designed to steal passwords and credit card details could become a whole lot easier for determined scammers  says stephen dyer  director of ukif. domain names are the  real language  addresses of websites  rather than their internet protocol address  which is a series of numbers. they are used so people can more easily navigate the web. so-called ascii codes are used to represent european languages but for other languages a hybrid of a system called unicode is used. so  for example  website paypal could now be coded using a mixture of the latin alphabet and the russian alphabet. the resulting domain as displayed to the users would look identical to the real site as a russian  a  look just like an english  a . but the computer code would be different  and the site it would lead users to could be a fake. this is more than just a theory. a fake paypal.com has already been registered with net domain giant verisign by someone who has followed the debate around the internationalised domain name (idn) system  said mr dyer. as the idea was to prove a point rather than be malicious the fake domain has now been handed back to paypal but it sets a worrying precedent  mr dyer said.  although the idn problem is well known in technical circles  the commercial world is totally unaware how easily their websites can be faked   said mr dyer.   it is important to alert users that there is a new and invisible and almost undetectable way of diverting them to what looks like a perfectly genuine site   he added. there are solutions. for instance  browsers could spot domains that use mixed characters and display them in different colours as a warning to users. mr dyer acknowledged that it would be a huge undertaking to update all the world s browsers. another solution  to introduce idn-disabled browsers could be a case of  throwing out the baby with the bath water   he said. centr  the council of european national top level domain registries  agrees.  a rush to introduce idn-disabled browsers into the marketplace is an overly-zealous step that will harm public confidence in idns - a technology that is desperately needed in the non-english speaking world   the organisation said in a statement.
court mulls file-sharing future judges at the us supreme court have been hearing evidence for and against file-sharing networks.  the court will decide whether producers of file-sharing software can ultimately be held responsible for copyright infringement. they questioned if opening the way for the entertainment industry to sue file-sharers could deter innovation. they also said that file-trading firms had some responsibility for inducing people to piracy.  the lawsuit  brought by 28 of the world s largest entertainment firms  has raged for several years. legal experts agree that if the supreme court finds in favour of the music and movie industry they would be able to sue file-trading firms into bankruptcy. but if the judge rules that grokster and morpheus - the file-sharers at the centre of the case - are merely providers of technology that can have legitimate as well as illegitimate uses  then the music and movie industry would be forced to abandon its pursuit of file-sharing providers. instead  they would have to pursue individuals who use peer-to-peer networks to get their hands on free music and movies. the hi-tech and entertainment industries have been divided on the issue. intel filed a document with the supreme court earlier this month in defence of grokster and others  despite misgivings about some aspects of the file-sharing community. it summed up the attitude of many tech firms in its submission which states that its products  are essentially tools  that like any other tools  capable of being used by consumers and businesses for unlawful purposes .  asking firms to second-guess the uses that its technologies would be put to  and to build in ways of preventing illegitimate use  would stifle innovation  it said. the electronic frontier foundation  a civil rights watchdog  is also defending streamcast networks  the company behind the morpheus file-sharing software. the case raises a question of critical importance at the border between copyright and innovation  it said. it cites  as do many  the landmark ruling in 1984 which found that sony should not be held responsible for the fact that its betamax video recorder could be used for piracy. defenders remain optimistic that the judges will rule in favour of the peer-to-peer networks  upholding the precedent set by the sony betamax case. a small band of supporters were outside the court as the lawyers entered  wearing  save betamax  t-shirts.  the betamax principles stand as the magna carta for the technology industry and are responsible for the explosion in innovation that has occurred in the us over the past 20 years   said gary shapiro  chief executive of the consumer electronics association. supreme court justice stephen breyer said that inventions from printing to apple s ipod could be used to illegally duplicate copyrighted materials but had  on balance  been beneficial to society. he said that while file-trading software can be used to illegally trade movies and music  conceptually the technology had  some really excellent uses .  based on tuesday s hearing it seems unlikely that the betamax ruling will be overturned but file-sharing firms might still be held responsible for encouraging or inducing piracy. grokster s lawyer argued that the company should be judged by its current behaviour rather than what it did when it first set up. but this argument was dismissed as  ridiculous  by justice david souter. cea boss mr shapiro thinks the case is the most important that the supreme court will hear this year.  it s about preserving america s proud history of technological innovation and protecting the ability of consumers to access and utilise technology   he said. the case has already been heard by two lower courts and both found in favour of the peer-to-peer networks. they ruled that despite being used to distribute millions of illegal songs  file-sharing could also be used to cheaply distribute software  government documents and promotional copies of music.
more movies head to sony s psp movies open water and saw are among those to be made available for sony s psp games console.  film studio lions gate entertainment has announced an initial list of 12 movies that will be on the umd format used by the handheld.  the typical buyer of the machine [is] the core demographic to whom our films generally appeal   said steve beeks  president of lions gate. already available in japan  the psp is released in the us on 24 march. spider-man 2 on umd will be given to the first million customers in the us.  the punisher and house of the dead along with older titles such as total recall and rambo: first blood  will be in the umd format  with disks costing between $20 (£10.40) to $30 (£15.60) for new titles and $10 (£5.20) to $20 for older films.   when we first saw the machine and started talking to sony  we immediately decided it was going to be a winner  both from the gaming perspective and from the perspective of people watching movies on the go   mr beeks said. the disks  which are smaller than dvds  only work in sony s psp and can hold up to 1.8gb of data.  we actually believe people who buy the umd would not have bought it on dvd   he said.  there are people who will want umd because of the portability. maybe they re already taking the games with them out of the house  and they re bigger gamers than they are movie watchers.  four movies have already been announced for psp. they are: xxx  hellboy  resident evil: apocalypse and once upon a time in mexico.
lasers help bridge network gaps an indian telecommunications firm has turned to lasers to help it overcome the problems of setting up voice and data networks in the country.  tata teleservices is using the lasers to make the link between customers  offices and its own core network. the laser bridges work across distances up to 4km and can be set up much faster than cable connections. in 12 months the lasers have helped the firm set up networks in more than 700 locations.   in this particular geography getting permission to dig the ground and lay the pipes is a bit of a task   said mr r. sridharan  vice president of networks at tata.  heavy traffic and the layout under the ground mean that digging is uniquely difficult   he said. in some locations  he said  permission to dig up roads and lay cables was impossible to get. he said it was far easier to secure permission for putting networking hardware on roofs. this has led chennai-based tata to turn to equipment that uses lasers to make the final mile leap between tata s core network and the premises of customers. the lightpointe laser bridges work over distances of up to 4km and are being used to route both voice and data from businesses on to the backbone of the network. the hardware works in pairs and beam data through the air in the form of laser pulses.  the laser bridges can route data at speeds up to 1.25gbps (2 000 times faster than a 512kbps broadband connection) but tata is running its hardware at more modest speeds of 1-2mbps. the lasers are also ideal for india because of its climate.  it s particularly suitable as the rain rate is a little low and it s hardly ever foggy   he said. in places where rain is heavy and fog is common laser links can struggle to maintain good connection speeds. the laser links also take far less time to set up and get working  said mr sridharan.  once we get the other permissions  normal time period for set up is a few hours   he said. by contrast  he said  digging up roads and laying cables can take weeks or months. this speed of set up has helped tata with its aggressive expansion plans. just over 12 months ago the firm had customers in only about 70 towns and cities. but by the end of march the firm hopes to reach more than 1 000.  speed is very important because of the pace of competition   said mr sridharan.
t-mobile bets on  pocket office  t-mobile has launched its latest  pocket office  third-generation (3g) device which also has built-in wi-fi - high-speed wireless net access.  unlike other devices where the user has to check which high-speed network is available to transfer data  the device selects the fastest one itself. the mda iv  released in the summer  is an upgrade to the company s existing smartphone  the 2.5g/wi-fi mda iii. it reflects the push by mobile firms for devices that are like mini laptops. the device has a display that can be swivelled and angled so it can be used like a small computer  or as a conventional clamshell phone. the microsoft mobile phone  with two cameras and a qwerty keyboard  reflects the design of similar all-in-one models released this year  such as motorola s mpx.  one in five european workers are already mobile - meaning they spend significant time travelling and out of the office   rene obermann  t-mobile s chief executive  told a press conference at the 3gsm trade show in cannes. he added:  what they need is their office when they are out of the office.  t-mobile said it was seeing increasing take up for what it calls  office in a pocket  devices  with 100 000 mdas sold in europe already.  in response to demand  t-mobile also said it would be adding the latest phone-shaped blackberry to its mobile range. reflecting the growing need to be connected outside the office  it announced it would introduce a flat-fee £20 ($38) a month wi-fi tariff for people in the uk using its wi-fi hotspots. it said it would nearly double the number of its hotspots - places where wi-fi access is available - globally from 12 300 to 20 000.  it also announced it was installing high-speed wi-fi on certain train services  such as the uk s london to brighton service  to provide commuters a fast net connection too. the service  which has been developed with southern trains  nomad digital (who provide the technology)  begins with a free trial on 16 trains on the route from early march to the end of april. a full service is set to follow in the summer. wi-fi access points will be connected to a wimax wireless network - faster than wi-fi - running alongside the train tracks. brian mcbride  managing director of t-mobile in the uk  said:  we see a growing trend for business users needing to access e-mail securely on the move.   we are able to offer this by maintaining a constant data session for the entire journey.  he said this was something other similar in-train wi-fi services  such as that offered on gner trains  did not offer yet. mr obermann added that the mobile industry in general was still growing  with many more opportunities for more services which would bear fruit for mobile companies in future. thousands of mobile industry experts are gathered in cannes  france  for the 3gsm which runs from 14 to 17 february.
cable offers video-on-demand cable firms ntl and telewest have both launched video-on-demand services as the battle between satellite and cable tv heats up.  movies from sony pictures  walt disney  touchstone  miramax  columbia and buena vista will be among those on offer. the service is similar to sky plus  as users can pause  fast forward and rewind content  but they cannot store programmes on their set top box - yet. it could sound the death knell for some tv channels  telewest predicts.  it allows us to demonstrate a clear competitive advantage over sky for the first time in many years   said telewest chief executive eric tveter.   video-on-demand will offer a deeper range of content than currently exists on tv. there will be less compromising around the tv schedule and some of the less popular channels may go by the wayside   said philip snalune  director of products at telewest. telewest customers in bristol and ntl viewers in glasgow will be the first to test the new service  which sees a raft of movies on offer for 24 hour rental. during the year  the service will be extended to all cable regions. films will range in price from £1 or £2 for archived movies to £3.50 for current releases. new releases initially on offer will include 50 first dates  kill bill: volume 2  gothika and the station agent. in addition  ntl is offering children s programmes  adult content  music video and concerts. telewest will launch similar services later in the year. ntl is also offering viewers the chance to catch up with programmes they have missed. its pick of the week service will offer a selection of bbc programmes from the previous seven days such as eastenders  casualty  top gear and antiques roadshow. the bbc is trialling a similar service  offering broadband users the chance to watch programmes already broadcast on their pc. for telewest it is the beginning of a £20m investment in tv-on-demand which will also see the launch of a personal video recorder (pvr). pvr has been a big success for sky because it gives customers control over programmes. satellite customers without pvr cannot pause  rewind or fast forward their programmes.  with both services on offer from telewest  mr tveter is confident the cable firm can dent not just the viewing figures for terrestrial tv but also gain a huge competitive advantage over sky.   we offer the best of both worlds and most households have an interest in having both video-on-demand and pvr   he said. video rental stores may also have to watch their back.  video-on-demand is better than having a video-store in your living room and is more convenient   he said. ntl said it had not ruled out the possibility of offering a pvr but for the moment is concentrating on video-on-demand.  pvr is a recording mechanism whereas what we are offering is truly on demand   said a spokesman for the company. video-on-demand has the added advantage of not requiring a separate set-top box or extra remote controls  he added. adam thomas  an analyst at research firm informa media believes the time is ripe for video-on-demand to flourish.  while sky will remain the dominant force in uk pay tv for some time to come  ntl and telewest seem well placed to successfully ride this second wave of vod enthusiasm and  if marketed correctly  this could help them eat into sky s lead   he said.
apple unveils low-cost  mac mini  apple has unveiled a new  low-cost macintosh computer for the masses  billed as the mac mini.  chief executive steve jobs showed off the new machine at his annual macworld speech  in san francisco. the $499 macintosh  sold for £339 in the uk  was described by jobs as the  most important mac  made by apple. mr jobs also unveiled the ipod shuffle  a new music player using cheaper flash memory rather than hard drives  which are used in more expensive ipods.  the new computer shifts the company into new territory - traditionally  the firm is known as a design and innovation-led firm rather than as a mass-market manufacturer. the mac mini comes without a monitor  keyboard and mouse  and a second version with a larger hard drive will also be sold for $599.  the machine - which will be available from 22 january - was described by jobs as  byodkm... bring your own display  keyboard  and mouse . in an attempt to win over windows pc customers  mr jobs said it would appeal to people thinking of changing operating systems.  people who are thinking of switching will have no more excuses   he said.  it s the newest and most affordable mac ever.  the new computer has been the subject of speculation for several weeks and while few people will be surprised by the announcement many analysts had already said it was a sensible move. in january  apple sued a website after it published what it said were specifications for the new computer. ian harris  deputy editor of uk magazine mac format  said the machine would appeal to pc-owning consumers who had purchased an ipod.   they want a further taste of mac because they like what they have seen with ipod.  harris added:  everybody thought that apple was happy to remain a niche maker of luxury computers  and moving into a market dominated by low margin manufacturers like dell is a bold move.  but it shows that apple is keen to capitalise on the mass market success it s had with the ipod. the mac mini will appeal to pc users looking for an attractive   no fuss  computer.  the new ipod shuffle comes in two versions - one offering 512mb of storage for $99 (£69 in the uk) and a second with one gigabyte of storage for $149 (£99) - and went on sale tuesday. the music player has no display and will play songs either consecutively or shuffled. the smaller ipod will hold about 120 songs  said mr jobs. mr jobs told the delegates at macworld that ipod already had a 65% market share of all digital music players.
web photo storage market hots up an increasing number of firms are offering web storage for people with digital photo collections.  digital cameras were the hot gadget of christmas 2004 and worldwide sales of the cameras totalled $24bn last year. many people s hard drives are bulging with photos and services which allow them to store and share their pictures online are becoming popular. search firms such as google are also offering more complex tools for managing personal photo libraries. photo giants such as kodak offer website storage which manages photo collections  lets users edit pictures online and provides print-ordering services. some services  such as kodak s ofoto and snapfish  offer unlimited storage space but they do require users to buy some prints online. other sites  such as pixagogo  charge a monthly fee. marcus hawkins  editor of digital camera magazine  said:  as file sizes of pictures increase  storage becomes a problem.  people are using their hard drives  backing up on cd and dvd and now they are using online storage solutions.   they are a place to store pictures  to share their pictures with families and friends and they can print out their photos.   while many of the services are aimed at the amateur and casual digital photographer  other websites are geared up for enthusiasts who want to share tips and information. photosig is an online community of photographers who can critique each other s work. on tuesday  google released free software for organising and finding digital photos stored on a computer s hard drive. the tool  called picasa  automatically detects photos as they are added to a pc - whether sent via e-mail or transferred from a digital camera.  the software includes tools for restoring colour and removing red eye  as well as sharpening images. photos can then be uploaded to sites such as ofoto. many people use the sites to edit and improve their favourite photographs before ordering prints. mr hawkins added:  the growth area is that you can order your prints online. friends and family can also access pictures you want them to see and they can print them out too.  rather than just a place to dump your pictures  it s about sharing them.   the vast majority of pictures remain on a pc s hard drive  which is why search tools  such as those offered by google  become increasingly important. but some historians and archivists are concerned that the need for perfect pictures will mean that those poor quality prints which offered a tantilising glimpse of the past may disappear forever.  it s one thing taking pictures  it s another finding them   said mr hawkins.  but this is the same problem that has always existed - how many of us have photos in wallets tucked away somewhere
ask jeeves joins web log market ask jeeves has bought the bloglines website to improve the way it handles content from web journals or blogs.  the bloglines site has become hugely popular as it gives users one place in which to read  search and share all the blogs they are interested in. ask jeeves said it was not planning to change bloglines but would use the 300 million articles it has archived to round out its index of the web. how much ask jeeves paid for bloglines was not revealed.  bloglines has become popular because it lets users build a list of the blogs they want to follow without having to visit each journal site individually. to do this it makes use of a technology known as really simple syndication (rss) that many blogs have adopted to let other sites know when new entries are made on their journals. the acquisition follows similar moves by other search sites. google acquired pyra labs  makers of the blogger software  in 2003. in 2004 msn introduced its own blog system and yahoo has tweaked its technology to do a better job of handling blog entries. jim lanzone  vice president of search properties at ask jeeves in the us  said it did not acquire bloglines just to get a foothold in the blog publishing world. he said ask jeeves was much more interested in helping people find information they were looking for rather than helping them write it.   the universe of readers is vastly larger than the universe of writers   he said. mr lanzone said the acquisition would sit well with ask s my jeeves service which lets people customise their own web experience and build up a personal collection of useful links.  search engines are about discovering information for the first time and rss is the ideal way to keep track of and monitor those sites   he said. it would also help drive information and entries from blogs to the portals that ask jeeves operates. there would be no instant sweeping changes to bloglines  said mr lanzone.  our intent is to take our time to figure out the right business model not to try to monetise it right away   he said. though mr lanzone added that ask jeeves would be helping organise the database of 300m blog entries bloglines holds with its own net indexing technology.  being able to search the blogosphere as one corpus of information will be very useful in its own right   said mr lanzone. rumours about the acquisition were broken by the napsterization weblog which said it got the hint from ask jeeves insiders.
new browser wins over net surfers the proportion of surfers using microsoft s internet explorer (ie) has dropped to below 90%  say web analysts.  net traffic monitor  onestat.com  has reported that the open-source browser firefox 1.0  released on 9 november  seems to be drawing users away from ie. while ie s market share has dropped 5% since may to 88.9%  mozilla browsers - including firefox - have grown by 5%. firefox is made by the mozilla foundation which was set up by former browser maker netscape in 1998. although there have been other preview versions of firefox  version 1.0 was the first complete official program.  it seems that people are switching from microsoft s internet explorer to mozilla s new firefox browser   said niels brinkman  co-founder of amsterdam-based onestat.com.  mozilla browsers - including firefox 1.0 - now have 7.4% of the market share  the figures suggest. mozilla said that more than five million have downloaded the free software since its official release. supporters of the open-source software in the us managed to raise $250 000 (£133 000) to advertise the release of firefox 1.0 in the new york times  and support the mozilla foundation. there was a flurry of downloads on its first day of release.  the figures echo similar research from net analyst websidestory which suggested that ie had 92.9% of users in october compared to 95.5% in june. microsoft ie has dominated the browser market for some time after taking the crown from netscape  and its share of users has always stayed at around the 95% mark. firefox is attractive to many because it is open-source. that means people are free to adapt the software s core code to create other innovative features  like add-ons or extensions to the program. fewer security holes have also been discovered so far in firefox than in ie. paul randle  microsoft windows client product manager  responded to the figures:  we certainly respect that some customers will choose alternative browsers and that choosing a browser is about more than a handful of features.  microsoft continues to make significant investments in ie  including service pack 2 with advanced security technologies  and continues to encourage a vibrant ecosystem of third party add-ons for internet explorer.  firefox wants to capture 10% of the market by the end of 2005. other browser software  like opera and apple s safari  are also challenging microsoft s grip on the browser market. opera is set to release its version 7.60 by the end of the year. onestat.com compiled the statistical measurements from two million net users in 100 countries.
bad e-mail habits sustains spam the  bad behaviour  of e-mail users is helping to sustain the spam industry  a new study has found.  according to a survey conducted by security firm mirapoint and market research company the radicati group  nearly a third of e-mail users have clicked on links in spam messages. one in ten users have bought products advertised in junk mail. clicking on a link in a spam message can expose people to viruses and alert spammers to live e-mail accounts.  the fact that one in ten e-mail users are buying things advertised in spam continues to make it an attractive business  especially given that sending out huge amounts of spam costs very little  the report concludes.  this preliminary data is surprising and somewhat shocking to us   said marcel nienhuis  market analyst at the radicati group.  it explains why e-mail security threats including spam  viruses and phishing scams continue to proliferate   he said  accusing users of  bad e-mail behaviour . spammers are increasingly hooking into whatever happens to be flavour of the month  according to security firm clearswift. it has recently seen a rise in the number of spam messages offering phoney sony psp giveaways. and  in perhaps a nod to the popularity of the american drama series desperate housewives  it has also seen a dramatic rise in junk mails purporting to give details of women looking for casual sex. but rather than finding a companion  users who click on such mail will find themselves redirected to porn sites  where they run the risk of downloading spyware on to their pc. clearswift has seen a 180% rise in sex-related spam over the course of the last month.  without casting aspersions  those likely to respond to these kind of adverts will be invariably hoping that  one thing leads to another  but aside from the fact that these mails are bogus  clicking on any link within a spam mail can lead to a whole host of unwanted problems   said alyn hockey  clearswift s director of research.  sexually explicit terms make up 14% of security firm sophos  top 50 word that spammers most commonly try to disguise in order to beat anti-spam filters. spammers will deliberately misspell a word or use digits instead of letters in an attempt to by-pass anti-spam software  said graham cluley  senior technology consultant for security firm sophos.  the list of words most commonly hidden by the spammers from anti-spam software reveals that most spam is about the old favourites: money  drugs and sex   said mr cluley. but anti-spam filters can only be part of the solution to the menace of junk e-mail.  people must resist their basic instincts to buy from spam mails. spammers are criminals  plain and simple. if no-one responded to junk e-mail and didn t buy products sold in this way  then spam would be as extinct as the dinosaurs   he said.
bond game fails to shake or stir for gaming fans  the word goldeneye evokes excited memories not only of the james bond revival flick of 1995  but also the classic shoot-em-up that accompanied it and left n64 owners glued to their consoles for many an hour.  adopting that hallowed title somewhat backfires on this new game  for it fails to deliver on the promise of its name and struggles to generate the original s massive sense of fun. this however is not a sequel  nor does it relate to the goldeneye film. you are the eponymous renegade spy  an agent who deserts to the bond world s extensive ranks of criminal masterminds  after being deemed too brutal for mi6. your new commander-in-chief is the portly auric goldfinger  last seen in 1964  but happily running around bent on world domination. with a determination to justify its name which is even less convincing than that of tina turner s similarly-titled theme song  the game literally gives the player a golden eye following an injury  which enables a degree of x-ray vision.  rogue agent signals its intentions by featuring james bond initially and proceeding to kill him off within moments  squashed by a plummeting helicopter. the notion is of course to add a novel dark edge to a 007 game  but the premise simply does not get the juices flowing like it needs to.  recent bond games like nightfire and everything or nothing were very competent and did a fine job of capturing the sense of flair  invention and glamour of the film franchise. this title lacks that aura  and when the bond magic shines through  it feels like a lucky accident. the central problem is that the gameplay just is not good enough. quite aside from the bizarre inability to jump  the even more bizarre glaring graphical bugs and dubious enemy ai  the levels simply are not put together with much style or imagination. admittedly the competition has been tough  even in recent weeks  with the likes of halo 2 and half life 2 triumphing in virtually every department. what the game is good at is enveloping you in noisy  dynamic scenes of violent chaos. as is the trend of late  you are made to feel like you are in the midst of a really messy and fraught encounter. sadly that sense of action is outweighed by the difficulty of navigating and battling within the chaos  meaning that frustration is often the outcome. and irregular save points mean you have to backtrack each time you are killed. a minute red dot passes for a crosshair  although the collision-detection is so suspect that the difficulties of aiming weapons are compensated for. shooting enemies from a distance can be tricky  and you will not always know you have picked them off  since dead enemies vanish literally before they have fully hit the floor  and they do so in some woefully uninspiring death animations. it is perhaps indicative of a lack of confidence that the game maker s allow you several different weapons almost immediately and throw you quickly into raging firefights - no time is risked with a measured build-up.  by far the most satisfying element of the game is seeing old favourites like dr no  goldfinger  hat-fiend oddjob and crazed russian sex beast xenia onatopp resurrected after all these years  and with their faces rendered in an impressively recognisable fashion.  there is a real thrill from doing battle with these legendary villains  and it is a testament to the power of the bond universe that they can cut such a dash. but the in-game niggles  combined with a story and presentation that just do not feel sufficiently well thought-through  will make this a disappointment for most. diehard fans of bond will probably find enough here to make it a worthwhile purchase and try to ignore the failings. the game is weak  not completely unplayable. then again  007 fanatics may also take umbrage at the cavalier blending of characters from different eras. given james bond s healthy pedigree in past games  there is every reason to hope that this is just a blip  a commendable idea that just has not worked  that will be rectified when the character inevitably makes his return.  goldeneye: rogue agent is out now
ibm puts cash behind linux push ibm is spending $100m (£52m) over the next three years beefing up its commitment to linux software.  the cash injection will be used to help its customers use linux on every type of device from handheld computers and phones right up to powerful servers. ibm said the money will fund a variety of technical  research and marketing initiatives to boost linux use. ibm said it had taken the step in response to greater customer demand for the open source software.  in 2004 ibm said it had seen double digit growth in the number of customers using linux to help staff work together more closely. the money will be used to help this push towards greater collaboration and will add linux-based elements to ibm s workplace software. workplace is a suite of programs and tools that allow workers to get at core business applications no matter what device they use to connect to corporate networks. one of the main focuses of the initiative will be to make it easier to use linux-based desktop computers and mobile devices with workplace. even before ibm announced this latest spending boost it was one of the biggest advocates of the open source way of working. in 2001 it put $300m into a three-year linux program and has produced linux versions of many of its programs. linux and the open source software movement are based on the premise that developers should be free to tinker with the core components of software programs. they reason that more open scrutiny of software produces better programs and fuels innovation.
microsoft gets the blogging bug software giant microsoft is taking the plunge into the world of blogging.  it is launching a test service to allow people to publish blogs  or online journals  called msn spaces. microsoft is trailing behind competitors like google and aol  which already offer services which make it easy for people to set up web journals. blogs  short for web logs  have become a popular way for people to talk about their lives and express opinions online.  msn spaces is free to anyone with a hotmail or msn messenger account. people will be able to choose a layout for the page  upload images and share photo albums and music playlists. the service will be supported by banner ads.  this is a simple tool for people to express themselves   said msn s blake irving. this is microsoft s first foray into blogging  which has taken off as a web phenomenon in the past year. competitors like google already offer free services through its blogger site  while aol provides its members with journals. accurate figures for the number of blogs in existence are hard to come by. according to blog analysis firm technorati  the so-called blogosphere  has doubled every five and a half months for the last 18 months. it now estimates that the number of blogs in existence has exceeded 4.8 million  although some speculate that less than a quarter are regularly maintained.
virus poses as christmas e-mail security firms are warning about a windows virus disguising itself as an electronic christmas card.  the zafi.d virus translates the christmas greeting on its subject line into the language of the person receiving infected e-mail. anti-virus firms speculate that this multilingual ability is helping the malicious program spread widely online. anti-virus firm sophos said that 10% of the e-mail currently on the net was infected with the zafi virus.  like many other windows viruses  zafi-d plunders microsoft outlook for e-mail addresses and then uses mail-sending software to despatch itself across the web to new victims. to be infected users must open up the attachment travelling with the message which bears the code for the malicious bug. the attachment on the e-mail poses as an electronic christmas card but anyone opening it will simply get a crude image of two smiley faces.  the virus  subject line says  merry christmas  and translates this into one of 15 languages depending of the final suffix of the e-mail address the infected message has been sent to. the message in the body of the e-mail reads:  happy holidays  and this too is translated. on infected machines the virus tries to disable anti-virus and firewall software and opens up a backdoor on the pc to hand over control to the writer of the virus. the virus is thought to have spread most widely in south america  italy  spain  bulgaria and hungary. the original zafi virus appeared in april this year.  we have seen these hoaxes for several christmases already  and personally i prefer traditional pen and paper cards  and we recommend this to all our clients too   said mikko hypponen  who heads f-secure s anti-virus team.
commodore finds new lease of life the once-famous commodore computer brand could be resurrected after being bought by a us-based digital music distributor.  new owner yeahronimo media ventures has not ruled out the possibility of a new breed of commodore computers. it also plans to develop a  worldwide entertainment concept  with the brand  although details are not yet known. the groundbreaking commodore 64 computer elicits fond memories for those who owned one back in the 1980s.  in the chronology of home computing  commodore was one of the pioneers.  the commodore 64  launched in 1982  was one of the first affordable home pcs. it was followed a few years later by the amiga. the commodore 64 sold more than any other single computer system  even to this day. the brand languished somewhat in the 1990s. commodore international filed for bankruptcy in 1994 and was sold to dutch firm tulip computers. in the late 1980s the firm was a great rival to atari  which produced its own range of home computers and is now a brand of video games  formerly known as infogrames.  tulip computers sold several products under the commodore name  including portable usb storage devices and digital music players. it had planned to relaunch the brand  following an upsurge of nostalgia for 1980s-era games. commodore 64 enthusiasts have written emulators for windows pc  apple mac and even pdas so that the original commodore games can be still run. the sale of commodore is expected to be complete in three weeks in a deal worth over £17m.
xbox 2 may be unveiled in summer details of the next generation of microsoft s xbox games console - codenamed xenon - will most likely be unveiled in may  according to reports.  it was widely expected that gamers would get a sneak preview of xbox s successor at the game developers conference (gdc) in march. but a microsoft spokeswoman confirmed that it would not be at gdc. sony  microsoft and nintendo are all expected to release their more powerful machines in the next 18 months. the next xbox console is expected to go on sale at the end of the year  but very few details about it have been released. it is thought that the machine may be unveiled at the electronic entertainment expo (e3) in los angeles  which takes place in may  according to a reuters news agency report. e3 concentrates on showing off the latest in gaming to publishers  marketers and retailers. the gdc is aimed more at game developers. microsoft chief  bill gates  used the gdc event to unveil the original xbox five years ago. since its launch  microsoft has sold 19.9 million units worldwide.  at the consumer electronics show earlier this year  there was very little mention of the next generation gaming machine. in his keynote speech  mr gates only referred to it as playing an essential part of his vision of the digital lifestyle.  but the battle between the rival consoles to win gamers  hearts and thumbs will be extremely hard-fought. sony has traditionally dominated the console market with its playstation 2. but earlier this year  microsoft said it had reached a european milestone  selling five million consoles since its european launch in march 2002. hit games like halo 2  which was released in november  helped to buoy the sales figures.  gamers are looking forward to the next generation of machines because they will have much more processing and graphical power.  they are also likely to pack in more features and technologies that make them more central as entertainment and communications hubs. although details of playstation 3  xenon  and nintendo s so-called revolution  are yet to be finalised  developers are already working on titles. rory armes  studio general manager for games giant electronic arts (ea) in europe  recently told the bbc news website in an interview that ea was beginning to get a sense of the capabilities of the new machines. microsoft had delivered development kits to ea  but he said the company was still waiting on sony and nintendo s kits. but  he added  the playstation 3 was rumoured to have  a little more under the hood [than xbox 2] .
gritty return for prince of persia still basking in the relatively recent glory of last year s sands of time  the dashing prince of persia is back in warrior within  and in a more bellicose mood than last time.  this sequel gives the franchise a grim  gritty new look and ramps up the action and violence. as before  you control the super-athletic prince from a third-person perspective. the time-travelling plot hinges on the dahaka  an all-consuming monster pursuing our hero through the ages. the only way to dispel it is to turn back the clock again and kill the sultry empress of time before she ever creates the sands of time that caused the great beast s creation.  studiously structured though this back story is  everything boils down to old-fashioned fantasy gameplay which proves  on the whole  as dependable as it needs to be. ever since the series  then-groundbreaking beginnings on the commodore amiga  prince of persia has always been about meticulously-animated acrobatic moves  that provide an energetic blend of leaping preposterously between pieces of scenery and lopping off enemies  body parts.  those flashy moves are back in full evidence  and tremendous fun to perform and perfect. combining them at speed is the best fun  although getting a handle of doing so takes practice and plenty of skill. until you reach that point  it is a haphazard business. all too often  you will perform a stunning triple somersault  pirouette off a wall  knock out three enemies in one glorious swoop  before plummeting purposefully over a cliff to your doom. that in turn can mean getting set back an annoyingly long distance  for you can only save at the fountains dotted along the path. the expected fiendish puzzles are all present and correct  but combat is what is really been stepped up  and there is more of it than before. the game s developers have combined acrobatic flair with gruesome slaying techniques in some wonderfully imaginative ways. slicing foes down the middle is one particularly entertaining method of seeing them off.  warrior within is a very slick package; the game s intro movie is so phenomenally good that it actually does an ultimate disservice once the game itself commences.  it is on a par with the jaw-dropping opening sequence of onimusha 3 earlier this year  and when the game begins  it is something of an anti-climax. that said  the graphics are excellent  and indeed among the most striking and satisfying elements of the game. the music is probably the worst aspect - a merit-free heavy metal soundtrack that you will swiftly want to turn off. there is something strangely unsatisfying about the game. perhaps precisely because its graphics and mechanics are so good that the story and overall experience are not quite as engaging as they should be. somehow it adds up to less than the sum of its parts  and is more technically impressive than it is outright enjoyable. but that is not to say warrior within is anything other than a superb adventure that most will thoroughly enjoy. it just does not quite take the character to the new heights that might have been hoped for.
man auctions ad space on forehead a 20-year-old us man is selling advertising space on his forehead to the highest bidder on website ebay.  andrew fisher  from omaha  nebraska  said he would have a non-permanent logo or brand name tattooed on his head for 30 days.  the way i see it i m selling something i already own; after 30 days i get it back   he told the bbc today programme. mr fisher has received 39 bids so far  with the largest bid currently at more than $322 (£171).  the winner will be able to send me a tattoo or have me go to a tattoo parlour and get a temporary ink tattoo on my forehead and this will be something they choose  a company name or domain name  perhaps their logo   he told the radio 4 programme.  on the online auction  mr fisher describes himself as an  average american joe  give or take . his sales pitch adds:  take advantage of this radical advertising campaign and become a part of history.  mr fisher said that while he would accept any brand name or logo   i wouldn t go around with a swastika or anything racial . he added:  i wouldn t go around with 666  the mark of the beast.  other than that i wouldn t promote anything socially unacceptable such as adult websites or stores.  he said he would use the money to pay college - he is planning to study graphic design. the entrepreneur said his mother was initially surprised by his decision but following all the media attention she felt he was  thinking outside the box .
junk e-mails on relentless rise spam traffic is up by 40%  putting the total amount of e-mail that is junk up to an astonishing 90%.  the figures  from e-mail management firm email systems  will alarm firms attempting to cope with the amount of spam in their in-boxes. while virus traffic has slowed down  denial of service attacks are on the increase according to the firm. virus mail accounts for just over 15% of all e-mail traffic analysis by the firm has found.  it is no longer just multi-nationals that are in danger of so-called denial of service attacks  in which websites are bombarded by requests for information and rendered inaccessible. email systems refers to a small uk-based engineering firm  which received a staggering 12 million e-mails in january. the type of spam currently being sent has subtlety altered in the last few months  according to email systems analysis. half of spam received since christmas has been health-related with gambling and porn also on the increase. scam mails  offering ways to make a quick buck  have declined by 40%.  january is clearly a month when consumers are less motivated to purchase financial products or put money into dubious financial opportunities   said neil hammerton  managing director of email systems.  spammers seem to have adapted their output to reflect this  focussing instead on medically motivated and pornographic offers  presumably intentionally intended to coincide with what is traditionally considered to be the bleakest month in the calendar   he said.
what s next for next-gen consoles  the next generation of video games consoles are in development but what will the new machines mean for games firms and consumers  we may not know when they will be released  what they will be called or even what they will be able to do but one thing is certain - they are coming. sony  microsoft and nintendo are all expected to release new machines in the next 18 months. the details of playstation 3  xbox 2 (codename xenon) and nintendo s so-called revolution are still to be finalised but developers are having to work on titles for the new machines regardless.   we know maybe what the ps3 will do  but we can only guess   said rory armes  studio general manager for video game giant electronic arts in europe.  it s a horrendous effort in the first year   he admitted. microsoft had delivered development kits to ea  said mr armes  but he said the company was still waiting on sony and nintendo to send kits. although the details may not be nailed down  mr armes said ea was beginning to get a sense of the capabilities of the new machines.  the rumours are that playstation 3 will have a little more under the hood [than xbox 2]   he said.   microsoft is obviously a software company first and foremost  while sony has more experience in hardware. i think sony will be able to push more into a box at cost.   what is certain is that the new machines will provide great leaps in processing and graphical power. it is also likely that they will contain convergence technologies to make the machines more of an entertainment hub. at the consumer electronics show in las vegas microsoft boss bill gates said xbox 2 would be part of his vision of the digital lifestyle. while short on detail  he painted a picture of a machine that would complement a pc and offer  great video gaming but video gaming for a broader set of people  more communications  more media  more connectivity . sony is thought to have a similar vision for ps3 while nintendo remain focused on a machine purely for games.  until it is clear precisely what the new machines can do  developers are working on a first round of titles to harness the new horsepower. gary dunn  development director at codemasters  said the company had a central technology group which was at the forefront of preparing for the next generation of consoles.  we are working on new libraries of effects. a lot of the major techniques are already out there and in use in pc gaming  such as pixel shaders and normal mapping.   mr dunn said he expected the introduction of real-world physics to be a major part of the new consoles.  we want to increase that level of immersion and realism in gaming to people can lose themselves in a game.  in the first year at least  developers said gamers should not expect games which harness the full potential of the machines. graphical spit and polish and better physics in line with the capabilities of current high-end graphics cards for pcs should be expected. simon gardner  president of climax s action studio  said:  it s definitely an exciting time. we want to give more freedom to the player. we want to give players an emotional connection to the characters they play.  the environments will be much more believable and dramatic  growing and changing as you play.  there will be a breadth of effects  more involving worlds to play in.   it s a bit like being an artist and being given a bigger canvas and a smaller brush. we re being given more tools.  for the average consumer  we can get things of a more filmic quality.  gerhard florin  head of ea in europe  said gamers should expect titles that blur the line between films and video games. many will be sceptical - gamers were given similar predictions during the last transition of console hardware - but this time it would seem to be more likely.  ps3 will provide graphics indistinguishable from movies   said mr florin. he said the distribution method for games would also change radically in the next round of consoles.  a gamer could buy a starter disc for 10 euros. when he goes home he goes online and he could buy ai and levels as you go.   it s much smarter if you can get levels as you go.  mr armes warned that developers still had to learn how to tell stories effectively in the medium.  in some ways we are trying to forget about the hardware  go in the opposite direction. we have been very bad at letting technology design our creativity.  what we have to do as a company is start ignoring the technology and learning our craft in telling stories.  mr gardner agreed:  we can thrown more polygons around and have better ai but if it doesn t make for a better game then that s not very useful.  developers will certainly have the tools with the new machines  but how they employ them is still to be decided.
apple laptop is  greatest gadget  the apple powerbook 100 has been chosen as the greatest gadget of all time  by us magazine mobile pc.  the 1991 laptop was chosen because it was one of the first  lightweight  portable computers and helped define the layout of all future notebook pcs. the magazine has compiled an all-time top 100 list of gadgets  which includes the sony walkman at number three and the 1956 zenith remote control at two. gadgets needed moving parts and/or electronics to warrant inclusion. the magazine specified that gadgets also needed to be a  self-contained apparatus that can be used on its own  not a subset of another device .   in general we included only items that were potentially mobile   said the magazine.   in the end  we tried to get to the heart of what really makes a gadget a gadget   it concluded. the oldest  gadget  in the top 100 is the abacus  which the magazine dates at 190 a.d.  and put in 60th place. other pre-electronic gadgets in the top 100 include the sextant from 1731 (59th position)  the marine chronometer from 1761 (42nd position) and the kodak brownie camera from 1900 (28th position). the tivo personal video recorder is the newest device to make the top 10  which also includes the first flash mp3 player (diamound multimedia)  as well as the first  successful  digital camera (casio qv-10) and mobile phone (motorola startac). the most popular gadget of the moment  the apple ipod  is at number 12 in the list while the first sony transistor radio is at number 13.  sony s third entry in the top 20 is the cdp-101 cd player from 1983.  who can forget the crystalline  hiss-free blast of madonna s like a virgin emenating from their first cd player   asked the magazine. karl elsener s knife  the swiss army knife from 1891  is at number 20 in the list. gadgets which could be said to feature surprisngly low down in the list include the original telephone (23rd)  the nintendo gameboy (25th)  and the pulsar quartz digital watch (36th). the list also contains plenty of oddities: the pez sweet dispenser (98th)  1980s toy tamagotchi (86th) and the bizarre ronco inside the shell egg scrambler (84th).  why worry about mobile phones. soon they will be subsumed into the pda s / laptops etc.  what about the marine chronometer  completely revolutionised navigation for boats and was in use for centuries. for it s time  a technological marvel!  sony net minidisc! it paved the way for more mp3 player to explode onto the market. i always used my netmd  and could not go anywhere without it.  a laptop computer is not a gadget! it s a working tool!  the sinclair executive was the world s first pocket calculator. i think this should be there as well.  how about the clockwork radio  or gps  or a pocket calculator  all these things are useful to real people  not just pc magazine editors.  are the people who created this list insane   surely the most important gadget of the modern age is the mobile phone  it has revolutionalised communication  which is more than can be said for a niche market laptop. from outside the modern age  the marine chronometer is the single most important gadget  without which modern transportation systems would not have evolved so quickly.  has everyone forgot about the breville pie maker    an interesting list. of the electronic gadgets  thousands of journalists in the early 1980s blessed the original noteboook pc - the tandy 100. the size of a4 paper and light  three weeks on a set of batteries  an excellent keyboard  a modem. a pity tandy did not make it dos compatible.  what s an apple powerbook 100   it s out of date - not much of a  gadget . surely it has to be something simple / timeless - the tin opener  swiss army knife  safety razor blade  wristwatch or the thing for taking stones out of horses hooves    it has to be the mobile phone. no other single device has had such an effect on our way of living in such a short space of time.  the ball point pen has got to be one of the most used and common gadgets ever. also many might be grateful for the pocket calculator which was a great improvement over the slide rule.  the casio pocket calculator that played a simple game and made tinny noises was also a hot gadget in 1980. a true gadget  it could be carried around and shown off.  all top 10 are electronic toys  so the list is probably a better reflection of the current high-tech obsession than anyhting else. i say this as the swiss army knife only made no 20.  sinclair ql a machine far ahead of its time. the first home machine with a true multi-takings os. shame the marketing was so bad!!!  apple.. a triumph of fashion over... well everything else.  utter rubbish. yes  the apple laptop and sony walkman are classic gadgets. but to call the sextant and the marine chronometer  gadgets  and rank them as less important than a tv remote control reveals a quite shocking lack of historical perspective. the former literally helped change the world by vastly improving navigation at see. the latter is the seed around which the couch potato culture has developed. no competition.  i d also put apple s newton and the first palm pilot there as the front runners for portable computing  and possibly the toshiba libretto for the same reason. i only wish that vulcan inc s flipstart wasn t just vapourware otherwise it would be at the top.  how did a laptop ever manage to beat off the challenge of the wristwatch or the telephone (mobile or otherwise)  what about radios and tvs   the swiss army knife. by far the most useful gadget. i got mine 12 years ago. still wearing and using it a lot! it stood the test of time.  psion organiser series 3  should be up there. had a usable qwerty keyboard  removable storage  good set of apps and programmable. case design was good (batteries in the hinge - a first  i think). great product innovation.  the first mobile pc was voted best gadget by readers of...err... mobile pc ! why do you keep putting these obviously biased lists on your site  it s obviously the mobile phone or remote control  and readers of a less partisan publication would tell you that.  the motorola startac should be number one. why  there will be mobile phones long after notebook computers and other gadgets are either gone or integrated in communications devices.  the psion series 3c! the first most practical way to carry all your info around...  i too would back the sinclair spectrum - without this little beauty i would never have moved into the world of it and earn the living that i do now.  i d have put the mobile phone high up the list. probably a nokia model.  sinclair spectrum - 16k. it plugged into the tv. games were rubbish but it gave me a taste for programming and that s what i do for a living now.  i wish more modern notebooks -- even apple s newest offerings -- were more like the pb100. particularly disheartening is the demise of the trackball  which has given way to the largely useless  trackpad  which every notebook on the market today uses. they re invariably inaccurate  uncomfortable  and cumbersome to use.  congratulations to apple  a deserved win!
nintendo ds aims to touch gamers the mobile gaming industry is set to explode in 2005 with a number of high-profile devices offering a range of gaming and other features such as movie and music playback. market leader nintendo  however  is releasing a handheld console that it says will revolutionise the way games are played.  the first striking thing about the ds is how retro it looks. far from looking like a mould-breaking handheld  it looks more like nintendo dug out a mould from a 1980s handheld prototype. the lightweight clam shell device opens up to reveal two screens  and when switched on it instantly reveals its pedigree. both screens are crisp and clear while the bottom of the two is touch sensitive. nintendo has given developers free rein to utilise the dual screens and ability to control the action by simply touching the screen.  the japanese gaming giant hopes the ds will maintain the firm s pre-eminence in an increasingly-competitive mobile gaming market.  nintendo first launched its gameboy console in 1989 and has dominated the market ever since. but its lead can no longer be taken for granted. sony will enter the market later this year with its playstation portable  while start-up companies gizmondo and tapwave zodiac are also offering hybrid devices.  we believe the ds will appeal to all ages  both genders and gamers of any skill   said david yarnton  nintendo europe s general manager said at the recent press launch for the handheld. with its two screens  wireless connectivity and backwards compatibility with the gameboy advance  the ds certainly has a number of unique selling points. it went on sale in the us in mid-november priced $150 and nintendo says sales have exceeded expectations  without giving detailed figures. japan and europe will have to wait until the first quarter of 2005 to get the device. with more than two million pre-orders for the device in japan  nintendo is confident it will keep its number one spot. but will the device prove to be as revolutionary as claimed  the game ships with a demo of metroid hunters - a 3d action title which can be played alone or with a group of friends using the machine s wireless capabilities. it certainly looks impressive on the small machine and plays smoothly even with a group of people.  the game can be controlled by using the supplied stylus to aim. the top screen is used to navigate the action while the bottom screen offers a top-down map and the ability to switch weapons. it is certainly a unique control method and while it makes aiming more controlled it can be a little disorientating. super mario 64 ds is a faithful re-creation of the nintendo 64 classic with a host of new mini-games and new levels. the game looks stunning on the portable machine and the sound too is impressive for such a small machine. one thing is for certain. hardened gamers will have to learn to adapt to a new way of playing while it could prove to be an accessible way in to gaming for novices  ultimately the success or failure of the device lies in the hands of developers. if they manage to create titles which use the nintendo ds s key features then a whole new market of gamers could open up. the fear is that the touch screen and voice recognition are treated as little more than gimmicks.
pc ownership to  double by 2010  the number of personal computers worldwide is expected to double by 2010 to 1.3 billion machines  according to a report by analysts forrester research.  the growth will be driven by emerging markets such as china  russia and india  the report predicted. more than a third of all new pcs will be in these markets  with china adding 178 million new pcs by 2010  it said. low-priced computers made by local companies are expected to dominate in such territories  forrester said. the report comes less than a week after ibm  a pioneer of the pc business  sold its pc hardware division to china s number one computer maker lenovo.  the $1.75bn (£900m) deal will make the combined operation the third biggest pc vendor in the world.  today s products from western pc vendors won t dominate in those markets in the long term   simon yates  a senior analyst for forrester  said.  instead local pc makers like lenovo group in china and aquarius in russia that can better tailor the pc form factor  price point and applications to their local markets will ultimately win the market share battle   he said. there are currently 575 million pcs in use globally. the united states  europe and asia-pacific are expected to add 150 million new pcs by 2010  according to the study. the report forecast that there will be 80 million new pc users in india by 2010 and 40 million new users in indonesia.
sony psp console hits us in march us gamers will be able to buy sony s playstation portable from 24 march  but there is no news of a europe debut.  the handheld console will go on sale for $250 (£132) and the first million sold will come with spider-man 2 on umd  the disc format for the machine. sony has billed the machine as the walkman of the 21st century and has sold more than 800 000 units in japan. the console (12cm by 7.4cm) will play games  movies and music and also offers support for wireless gaming. sony is entering a market which has been dominated by nintendo for many years.  it launched its ds handheld in japan and the us last year and has sold 2.8 million units. sony has said it wanted to launch the psp in europe at roughly the same time as the us  but gamers will now fear that the launch has been put back. nintendo has said it will release the ds in europe from 11 march.  it has gaming at its core  but it s not a gaming device. it s an entertainment device   said kaz hirai  president of sony computer entertainment america.
apple makes blogs reveal sources apple has won its legal fight to make three bloggers reveal who told them about unreleased products.  the bid to unmask the employees leaking information was launched in december 2004 following online articles about apple s asteroid product. now apple has won the right to see e-mail records from the three bloggers to root out the culprit. a lawyer for the three bloggers said the ruling set a dangerous precedent that could harm all news reporters.  apple s lawsuit accused anonymous people of stealing trade secrets about the asteroid music product and leaking them to the powerpage  apple insider and think secret websites. all three are apple fan sites that obsessively watch the iconic firm for information about future products. apple is notoriously secretive about upcoming products which gives any snippets of information about what it is working on all the more value. the lawsuit to reveal the names of the leakers was filed against the power page and apple insider sites.  the separate legal fight with think secret has yet to be resolved. in the ruling handed down this week by santa clara county superior court judge james kleinberg  apple can now get its hands on e-mail records from the bloggers  net providers. in making his ruling  judge kleinberg said that laws covering the divulging of trade secrets outweighed considerations of public interest. california has so-called  shield  laws which protect journalists from prosecution if what they are writing about can be shown to be in the public interest. the judge wrote:  ...it is not surprising that hundreds of thousands of  hits  on a website about apple have and will happen. but an interested public is not the same as the public interest . judge kleinberg said the question of whether the bloggers were journalists or not did not apply because laws governing the right to keep trade secrets confidential covered journalists  too. the electronic frontier foundation  which is acting as legal counsel for power page and apple insider  said the ruling had potentially wide implications.  anyone who reports on companies or the trade press should be concerned about this ruling   said eff lawyer kurt opsahl. mr opsahl said the eff was planning to appeal against the ruling because the bloggers were journalists and us federal laws stop net firms handing over copies of e-mail messages if the owner of that account does not give their consent.
blog  picked as word of the year the term  blog  has been chosen as the top word of 2004 by a us dictionary publisher.  merriam-webster said  blog  headed the list of most looked-up terms on its site during the last twelve months. during 2004 blogs  or web logs  have become hugely popular and some have started to influence mainstream media. other words on the merriam-webster list were associated with major news events such as the us presidential election or natural disasters that hit the us.  merriam-webster defines a blog as:  a web site that contains an online personal journal with reflections  comments and often hyperlinks . its list of most looked-up words is drawn up every year and it discounts terms such as swear words  that everyone likes to look up  or those that always cause problems  such as  affect  and  effect .  merriam-webster said  blog  was the word that people have asked to be defined or explained most often over the last 12 months. the word will now appear in the 2005 version of merriam-webster s printed dictionary. however  the word is already included in some printed versions of the oxford english dictionary. a spokesman for the oxford university press said that the word was now being put into other dictionaries for children and learners  reflecting its mainstream use.  i think it was the word of last year rather than this year   he said.  now we re getting words that derive from it such as  blogosphere  and so on   he said.  but   he added   it s a pretty recent thing and in the way that this happens these days it s got established very quickly.   blogs come in many different forms. many act as news sites for particular groups or subjects  some are written from a particular political slant and others are simply lists of interesting sites. other terms in the top 10 were related to natural disasters that have struck the us  such as  hurricane  or were to do with the us election. words such as  incumbent    electoral  and  partisan  reflected the scale of interest in the vote. blogs also proved very useful to both sides in the us election battle because many pundits who maintain their own journals were able to air opinions that would never appear in more mainstream media. speculation that president bush was getting help during debates via a listening device was first aired on web logs. online journals also raised doubts about documents used by us television news organisation cbs in a story about president bush s war record. the immediacy of many blogs also helped some wield influence over topics that made it in to national press.  this is despite the fact that the number of people reading even the most influential blogs is tiny. statistics by web influence ranking firm hitwise reveal that the most popular political blog racks up only 0.0051% of all net visits per day. one of the reasons that blogs and regularly updated online journals have become popular is because the software used to put them together make it very easy for people to air their views online. according to blog analysis firm technorati the number of blogs in existence  the blogosphere  has doubled every five and a half months for the last 18 months. technorati now estimates that the number of blogs in existence has exceeded 4.8 million. some speculate that less than a quarter of this number are regularly maintained. according to us research firm pew internet & american life a blog is created every 5.8 seconds. another trend this year has been the increasing numbers of weblogs that detail the daily lives of many ordinary workers in jobs that few people know much about. in many repressive regimes and developing nations  blogs have been embraced by millions of people keen to give their plight a voice.
games win for blu-ray dvd format the next-generation dvd format blu-ray is winning more supporters than its rival  according to its backers.  blu-ray  backed by 100 firms including sony  is competing against toshiba and nec-backed hd-dvd to be the format of choice for future films and games. the blu-ray association said on thursday that games giants electronic arts and vivendi would both support its dvd format. the next generation of dvds will hold high-definition video and sound. this offers incredible 3d-like quality of pictures which major hollywood studios and games publishers are extremely keen to exploit in the coming year. in a separate press conference at the consumer electronics show in las vegas  toshiba announced that dvd players for its technology would be on the market by the end of 2005.   as we move from standard definition video images to high-definition images  we have a much greater need for storage   richard doherty  from panasonic s hollywood laboratories  one of the pioneers of blu-ray  told the bbc news website.  so by utilising blue laser-based technology we can make an optical laser disc that can hold six times as much as today s dvd.  a blu-ray disc will be able to store 50gb of high-quality data  while toshiba s hd-dvd will hold 30gb. mr doherty added that it was making sure the discs could satisfy all high-definition needs  including the ability to record onto the dvds and smaller discs to fit into camcorders. both toshiba and blu-ray are hopeful that the emerging dvd format war  akin to the betamax and vhs fight in the 1980s  can be resolved over the next year when next-generation dvd players start to come out. when players do come out  they will be able to play standard dvds too  which is good news for those who have huge libraries of current dvds.  but the support from vivendi and electronics arts is a big boost to blu-ray in the battle for supremacy.  gaming is a $20 billion industry worldwide  so is as crucial as the film industry in terms of money to be made.  the technical requirement for game development today demands more advanced optical-disc technologies   said michael heilmann  chief technology officer for vivendi universal.  blu-ray offers the capacity  performance and high-speed internet connectivity to take us into the future of gaming.  ea  a leading games developer and publisher  added that the delivery of high-definition games of the future was vital and blu-ray had the capacity  functionality and interactivity needed for the kinds of projects it was planning. sony recently announced it would be using the technology in its next generation of playstations. mr doherty said gamers were  ravenous  for high-quality graphics and technology for the next generation of titles.  gamers  especially those working on pcs  are always focused on more capacity to deliver textures  deeper levels  for delivering higher-resolution playback.   he added:  the focus for games moving forward is on increased immersion.   gaming companies really like to focus on creating a world which involves creating complicated 3d models and textures and increasing the resolution  increasing the frame rate - all of these are part of getting a more immersive experience.  fitting these models on current dvd technologies means compressing the graphics so much that much of this quality is lost. as games move to more photo-real capability  the current technology is limiting.  they are thrilled at the advanced capacity to start to build these immersive environments   said mr doherty. currently  graphics-intensive pc games also require multiple discs for installation. high-definition dvds will cut down on that need. likewise  consoles rely on single discs  so dvds that can hold six times more data mean much better  high-resolution games. blu-ray has already won backing from major hollywood studios  such as mgm studios  disney  and buena vista  as well as top technology firms like dell  lg  samsung and phillips amongst others. while toshiba s hd-dvd technology has won backing from paramount  universal and warner bros.  the real world benefits (of hd-dvd) are apparent and obvious   said jim cardwell  president of warner home video. mr cardwell added that rapid time to market and dependability were significant factors in choosing to go with hd-dvd. both formats are courting microsoft to be the format of choice for the next generation xbox  but discussions are still on-going. next generation dvds will also be able to store images and other data. ces is the largest consumer electronics show in the world  and runs from 6 to 9 january.
joke e-mail virus tricks users a virus that disguises itself as a joke is spreading rapidly across the net.  anti-virus firms are issuing high-level warnings about the new version of the bagle e-mail program that seems to be catching a lot of people out. the windows virus grabs e-mail addresses from microsoft outlook and uses its own mail sending software to spread itself to new victims. when it infects a machine  the bagle variant turns off security measures that usually protect pcs.  the new variant is called bagle.at  bagle.bb and bagle.au and the attachment bearing the virus code is labelled as either  joke  or  price .  the body of the virus usually contains nothing but a smiley or emoticon. the virus can strike computers running windows 95  98  me  nt  2000 and xp. users will be infected if they open the attachment that travels with the e-mail. as well as plundering microsoft outlook for e-mail addresses to send itself to  bagle.at also tries to turn off the firewall and security centre services on windows xp machines. bbc news online has received five warnings about the virus from security companies. finnish company f-secure gave the virus its second highest threat level.  we ve had several reports all over the world   said mikko hypponen  director of anti-virus research for f-secure. security firm network box said that it stopped more than 30 000 copies an hour of the virus as the outbreak reached a peak. black spider said it had stopped more than 1 million copies of bagle.at since the outbreak began at 0630 bst (0530 gmt). anti-virus firms urged users to be wary of unexpected e-mail messages bearing attachments and to update their software to ensure they are protected against the latest threats.
big war games battle it out the arrival of new titles in the popular medal of honor and call of duty franchises leaves fans of wartime battle titles spoilt for choice.  the acclaimed pc title call of duty has been updated for console formats  building on many of the original s elements. for its part  the long-running medal of honor series has added pacific assault to its pc catalogue  adapting the console game rising sun. call of duty: finest hour casts you as a succession of allied soldiers fighting on world war 2 battlefronts including russia and north africa. it is a traditional first-person-viewed game that lets you control just one character  in the midst of a unit where cohorts constantly bark orders at you. on a near-identical note  medal of honor: pacific assault does all it can to make you feel part of a tight-knit team and plum in the middle of all-out action. its arenas are the war s pacific battles  including guadalcanal and pearl harbour. you play one character throughout  a raw and rather talkative us soldier.  both games rely on a carefully stage-managed structure that keeps things ticking along. when this works  it is a brilliant device to make you feel part of a story. when it does not  it is tedious.  a winning moment is an early scene in pacific assault  where you come under attack at the famous us base in hawaii. you are first ushered into a gunboat attacking the incoming waves of japanese planes  then made to descend into a sinking battleship to rescue crewman  before seizing the anti-aircraft guns. it is one of the finest set-pieces ever seen in a video game. this notion of shuffling the player along a studiously pre-determined path  forcibly witnessing a series of pre-set moments of action  is a perilous business which can make the whole affair feel stilted rather than organic. the genius of something like half life 2 is that it skilfully disguises its linear plotting by various means of misdirection. this pair of games do not really accomplish that  being more concerned with imparting a full-on atmospheric experience.  call of duty comes with a suitably bombastic score and overblown presentation. finest hour has a similar determination  framing everything in moody wartime music  archive footage and lots of reflective voice-overs.  letting you play a number of different roles is an interesting ploy that adds new dimensions to the call of duty endeavour  even if it sacrifices the narrative flow somewhat. the game s drawback could be said to be its format; tastes differ  but these wartime shooters often do seem to work better on pc. the mouse control is a big reason why  along with the sharper graphics a top-end computer can muster and the apparent notion that pc games are allowed to get away with a bit more subtlety. call of duty on pc was more detailed  plot-wise and graphically  and this new adaptation feels a little rough and ready. targeting with the ps2 controller proved tricky  not helped by unconvincing collision-detection. you can shoot an enemy repeatedly with zero question as to your aim  yet the bullets will just refuse to hit him. checkpoints are so few and far between that when you get shot  which happens regularly  you are set harshly far back  and will find yourself covering vast tracts of scorched earth again and again. the game wants to be a challenge  and is  and many players will like it for that. it is as dynamic a battlefield simulator as you will experience and even if it is not as refined as its pc parent  the sense of being part of the action is thoroughly impressive.  both of these games feature military colleagues who are disturbingly bad shots and prone to odd behaviour. and in pacific assault in particular  their commands and comments are irritatingly meaningless.  but the teamwork element in titles like this is superficial  designed to add atmosphere and camaraderie rather than affect the gameplay mechanics at all. of the two games  pacific assault gets more things right  including little points like auto-saving intelligently and having tidier presentation. it engages you very well and also looks wonderful  making the most of the lush tropical settings that are reminiscent of the glorious far cry  although we had to ramp up the settings on a high-spec machine to get the most out of them. finest hour is by no means bad  and it is only because the pc original was so dazzling that this version sometimes feels underwhelming. those looking for a wartime game with plenty of atmosphere and a hearty abundance of enemies to shoot will be contented. but they will also have a niggling puzzlement as to why it does not break a little more ground rather then just being competent.
friends fear  with lost mobiles people are becoming so dependent on their mobile phones that one in three are concerned that losing their phone would mean they lose their friends.  more than 50% of mobile owners reported they had had their phone stolen or lost in the last three years. more than half (54%) of those asked in a poll for mobile firm intervoice said that they do not have another address book. a fifth rely entirely on mobiles. about 80% of uk adults own at least one mobile  according to official figures. it is estimated that 53% of over 65s own a mobile  according to intervoice  but the figures are higher for those aged between 15 and 34.  most 15 to 24-year-olds (94%)  and 25 to 34-year-olds (92%)  own at least one. nineteen percent of mobile owners were more concerned about how long it would take to find their contacts  information again if the phone was lost  stolen or replaced.  the survey showed that extent to which people have become reliant on their phones as address book. many mobile owners do not bother to make back-ups of their contact details  and with people changing their phones once a year on average  it becomes a problem. they also are becoming less likely to remember numbers by heart  relying on the mobile phone book instead.  we re a nation of lazy so-and-sos   david noone from intervoice said.  we put the numbers in our phones so we can call a friend at the touch of just one or two buttons and we certainly can t be bothered to write them down in an old fashioned address book.  the mobile phone plays such a key role in modern relationships; take the phone away and the way we manage these relationships falls apart.  one in three women  the survey said  thought if they lost their phones  it would mean they would lose touch with people altogether. most (62%) said they had no idea what their partner s number was. mr noone said it should be up to mobile operators to provide back-up services on the network itself  instead of relying on mobile owners to find ways themselves.  generally  information from sim cards can be backed up on physical memory cards  or can be copied onto computers via cables if the phone is a smartphone model with the right software. sim back-up devices can be bought from phone shops for just a few pounds.  but some operators offer customers free web-based back-up services too. orange told the bbc news website that those with orange smartphones could use the my phone syncing service which means back-ups of address books and other data are created online. for non-smartphone users  a memory mate card could be used to back up data on the phone. o2 also offers a free  web-based syncing service which works over gprs and gsm. neither vodafone or t-mobile currently offer a free network service for back-ups  but encourage people to use sim back-up devices. it is thought that about 10 000 phones are lost or stolen every month and 50% of total street crime involves a mobile. mobile phone sales are expected to continue growing over the next year. globally  more than 167 million mobile phones were sold in the third quarter of 2004  26% more than the previous year  according to analysts. it is predicted that there will be two billion handsets in use worldwide by the end of 2005.
game makers get xbox 2 sneak peek microsoft has given game makers a glimpse of the new xbox 2 console.  some details of the xbox s performance and what gaming will be like with the device were given at the annual game developers conference in the us. xbox frontman j. allard said the console looked set to be capable of one trillion calculations per second. also all titles for the new xbox will have the same interface to make it easy to play online and buy extras for characters or other add-ons for games.  microsoft is saving the official unveiling of the xbox 2  codenamed xenon  for the e3 show in may and the device could be on shop shelves by november. however  during his keynote speech at gdc mr allard  who heads development of game-making tools for the console  gave a glimpse into how some of its core software will work. he said gaming was entering a  high-definition  era that demanded detailed and convincing graphics that could adequately compete with the hdtv people were starting to watch as well as the hd dvds that will soon start to appear.  industry watchers took this to mean that the xbox 2 will push for hdtv quality graphics as standard as well as multi-channel audio to give gamers an authentic experience. mr allard said microsoft had to work hard to ensure that it was easy for game makers to produce titles for the xbox 2 and for players to get playing. to this end microsoft was building in to xbox hardware systems to support headset chat  buddy list controls and custom soundtracks so developers were free to concentrate on the games. the xbox would also support well-known industry specifications  such as directx  to make it simple for game studios to make titles for the console. for gamers this emphasis on ease of use would mean every xbox title uses the same interface to set up online play and get at music stored on the hardware. this interface will hold details of a player s statistics and skill level on a  gamer card  as well as give access to a store where people can spend small amounts of cash to buy extras for their avatars or add-ons  such as new maps or vehicles  for games they possess. this ability to personalise games and in-game characters would be key in the future  said mr allard. only with such consistency would the xbox be able to support the 10-20 million subscribers that it was aiming for  said mr allard. during his speech mr allard took several swipes at the playstation and said processors for consoles had to be made with developers  not just engineers  in mind.  our approach is bruce lee  not brute force   he said.
seamen sail into biometric future the luxury cruise liner crystal harmony  currently in the gulf of mexico  is the unlikely setting for tests of biometric technology.  as holidaymakers enjoy balmy breezes  their ship s crew is testing prototype versions of the world s first internationally issued biometric id cards  the seafarer s equivalent of a passport. along with the owner s picture  name and personal details  the new seafarers  identity document incorporates a barcode representing unique features of its holder s fingerprints. the cards are due to be issued in february next year  in line with the revised un convention on seafarers  identity documents of june 2003. tests currently under way in the caribbean are designed to ensure that new cards and their machine readers  produced by different companies in different countries  are working to interoperable standards. results of the current tests  which involve seafarers from a wide range of occupations and nationalities  will be published by the international labour organisation (ilo) by the end of november. crystal cruises  which operates the crystal harmony  is exploring the use of biometrics but has not yet committed to the technology.  authenti-corp  the us technology consultancy  has been working with the ilo on its technical specifications for the cards.   if you re issued a seafarer s id in your country  you want to be sure that when the ship lands in a port in  say  my country you can validate yourself using whatever equipment we have installed   authenti-corp s ceo  cynthia musselman  told the bbc s go digital programme. she said french  jordanian and nigerian nationals would be the first seafarers to get the new id cards since their countries have already ratified the convention. it aims to combat international terrorism whilst guaranteeing the welfare the one million seafarers estimated to be at sea. the convention highlights the importance of access to shore facilities and shore leave as vital elements to a sailor s wellbeing and  therefore  it says  to safer shipping and cleaner oceans.  by increasing security on the seas as well as border control and protection  the cards will hopefully reduce the number of piracy problems around the world   said ms musselman.  it should be a safer environment for seafarers to work in  and will allow people protecting their borders to have confidence that the people getting off the ship are  in fact  seafarers.
microsoft plans  safer id  system microsoft is planning to make windows and internet explorer more secure by including software to give people more control over personal information.   info cards  will help people manage personal details on their pcs to make online services safer  said microsoft. microsoft s two previous programs  passport and hailstorm  aimed to protect users but were criticised. id fraud is one of the uk s fastest-growing crimes  with criminals netting an estimated £1.3bn last year. a quarter of uk adults has either had their id stolen  via hi-tech or other means  or knows someone who has  a recent report by which  magazine found.  microsoft is developing a new version of internet explorer browser and its operating system  windows  which has been code-named longhorn. michael stephenson  director in microsoft s windows server division  would not confirm however whether the new info cards id system will be built into the current windows xp version or longhorn.   we re trying to make the end-user experience as simple as possible   mr stephenson said. the system would differ from its previous attempts to make online transactions more secure  said microsoft. while passport and hailstorm stored user information centrally on the net  the latest system will store data on a user s pc.  it s going to put control of digital ids into the hands of an end-user  the end-user will be in full control   said mr stephenson.  hailstorm was criticised by privacy campaigners for putting too much sensitive information into the hands of a single company. passport provides a single log-in for more than one website and stores basic personal information. but its popularity suffered after security scares. up to 200 million passport accounts were left vulnerable to online theft and malicious hackers after a flaw in the system was exploited in 2003. online auction site  ebay  stopped supporting it in january 2005. although the flaw was fixed  microsoft has come under regular criticism for the number of security loopholes in internet explorer. last year  it released a major security update for windows  service pack 2  to combat some of the security concerns. longhorn is due to be released commercially in late 2006  but an updated version of internet explorer is due for release later this year.
domain system opens door to scams a system to make it easier to create website addresses using alphabets like cyrillic could open a back door for scammers  a trade body has warned.  the internationalised domain names system has been a work in progress for years and has recently been approved by the internet engineering task force. but the uk internet forum (ukif) is concerned that the system will let scammers create fake sites more easily. the problem lies in the computer codes used to represent language.  registering names that look like that of legitimate companies but lead users to fake sites designed to steal passwords and credit card details could become a whole lot easier for determined scammers  says stephen dyer  director of ukif. domain names are the  real language  addresses of websites  rather than their internet protocol address  which is a series of numbers. they are used so people can more easily navigate the web. so-called ascii codes are used to represent european languages but for other languages a hybrid of a system called unicode is used. so  for example  website paypal could now be coded using a mixture of the latin alphabet and the russian alphabet. the resulting domain as displayed to the users would look identical to the real site as a russian  a  look just like an english  a . but the computer code would be different  and the site it would lead users to could be a fake. this is more than just a theory. a fake paypal.com has already been registered with net domain giant verisign by someone who has followed the debate around the internationalised domain name (idn) system  said mr dyer. as the idea was to prove a point rather than be malicious the fake domain has now been handed back to paypal but it sets a worrying precedent  mr dyer said.  although the idn problem is well known in technical circles  the commercial world is totally unaware how easily their websites can be faked   said mr dyer.   it is important to alert users that there is a new and invisible and almost undetectable way of diverting them to what looks like a perfectly genuine site   he added. there are solutions. for instance  browsers could spot domains that use mixed characters and display them in different colours as a warning to users. mr dyer acknowledged that it would be a huge undertaking to update all the world s browsers. another solution  to introduce idn-disabled browsers could be a case of  throwing out the baby with the bath water   he said. centr  the council of european national top level domain registries  agrees.  a rush to introduce idn-disabled browsers into the marketplace is an overly-zealous step that will harm public confidence in idns - a technology that is desperately needed in the non-english speaking world   the organisation said in a statement.
web radio takes spanish rap global spin the radio dial in the us and you are likely to find plenty of spanish-language music. but what you will not find is much spanish-language hip-hop.  hip-hop and rap are actually quite popular in the spanish-speaking world  but local artists are having trouble marketing their work abroad. but now  a us company is bringing rap and hip-hop en espanol to computer users everywhere. los caballeros de plan g are one of mexico s hottest hip-hop acts. they have a devoted fan base in their native monterrey. but most mexican hip-hop fans  not to mention fans in most of the spanish-speaking world  rarely get a chance to hear the group s tracks on the radio.   you can t really just go on the radio and listen to hip-hop in spanish... it s just not accessible   says manuel millan  a native of san diego  california.  it s really hard for the spanish hip-hop scene to get into mainstream radio. you usually have a very commercialised sound and the groups are not really known around the country or around the world.  millan and two friends set out to change that - they wanted to make groups like los caballeros de plan g accessible to fans globally.  mainstream radio stations were not going to play this kind of music  and starting their own broadcast station was economically impossible. so  millan and his friends launched a website called latinohiphopradio.com. the name says it all: it is web-based radio  devoted to the hottest spanish language rap and hip-hop tracks. the site  which is in both in english and spanish  is meant to be easy to navigate. all the user has to do is download a media player. there are no djs. it is just music streamed over the net for free. suddenly  with the help of the website  los caballeros de plan g are producing  export quality  rap.  the web might be just the right medium for spanish language hip-hop right now. the genre is in what millan calls its  infant stage . but the production values are improving  and artists such as argentina s mustafa yoda are pushing to make it better and better. mustafa yoda is currently one of the hottest tracks on latinohiphopradio.com.  he s considered the eminem of argentina  and the latin american hip-hop scene   millan says.  he really hasn t had that much exposure as far as anywhere in the world  but he s definitely the one to look out for as far as becoming the next big thing in the spanish-speaking world.  currently  the chilean group makisa is also in latinohiphopradio.com s top 10  as is cuban artist papo record.  every country s got it s own cultural differences and they try to put those into their own songs   millan says. latinohiphopradio.com has been up and running for a couple of months now. the site has listeners from across the spanish speaking world. right now  mexico leads the way  accounting for about 50% of listeners. but web surfers in spain are logging in as well - about 25% of the web station s traffic comes from there. that is not surprising as many consider spain to be the leader in spanish-language rap and hip-hop. millan says that spain is actually just behind the united states and france in terms of overall rap and hip-hop production. that might be changing  though  as more and more latin american artists are finding audiences.  but one spaniard is still firmly in latinohiphopradio.com s top 10. his name is tote king and manuel millan says that he is the hip-hop leader in spain. on his track uno contra veinte emcees  or one against 20 emcees  tote king shows he is well aware of that fact.  it s basically him bragging that he s one of the best emcees in spain right now   millan says.  and it s pretty much true. he has the tightest productions  and his rap flow is impeccable  it s amazing.  latinohiphopradio.com is hoping to expand in the coming year. millan says they want to include more music and more news from the world of spanish language hip-hop and rap.  clark boyd is technology correspondent for the world  a bbc world service and wgbh-boston co-production.
uk net users leading tv downloads british tv viewers lead the trend of illegally downloading us shows from the net  according to research.  new episodes of 24  desperate housewives and six feet under  appear on the web hours after they are shown in the us  said a report. web tracking company envisional said 18% of downloaders were from within the uk and that downloads of tv programmes had increased by 150% in the last year. about 70% were using file-sharing program bittorrent  the firm said.  it s now as easy to download a pirate tv show as it is to programme a vcr   said ben coppin from envisional. a typical episode of 24 was downloaded by about 100 000 people globally  said the report  and an estimated 20 000 of those were from within the uk.  fans of many popular us tv programmes  like 24  usually have to wait weeks or months until the latest series is shown in the uk. but in some cases  said the report  people were able to watch the new episodes in britain before us audiences on the west coast of the country.  missing a television show presents little problem to anyone with a basic knowledge of the internet   explained mr coppin.   two clicks and your favourite programme is downloading. in effect  the internet is now a global video recorder.  exact figures are difficult to pin down  but it is thought that about 80 000 to 100 000 people in the uk download tv programmes. some may just want the odd episode  others are downloading regularly. many broadcast analysts agree that the net is radically altering the way people get content  like tv programmes. this presents a challenge to broadcasters who are concerned that channel schedules may become less important to people. it is also of concern to them because advertisements are usually cut out of the downloaded programmes. the industry has coined the term  time-shifting  to describe this trend of being able to watch what you want  when you want. the increased popularity of personal digital video recorders  tivo-type boxes which automatically record programmes like sky+  have also contributed to the trend. there are also numerous programs available on the net which automatically search and store tv programmes for viewers  effectively creating a personal video recorder on a computer.  within half an hour  recorded episodes can be uploaded - or posted - onto file-sharing networks or other download sites. because they tend to be shorter then full-length films  they can be processed - digitised - quickly. more people with high-speed broadband connections in the uk also means that episodes can be downloaded quickly.  according to jupiter research 40% of homes with broadband say it helps them pick and choose the programmes they want to see or that friends have recommended. the envisional reports said that the tv industry should consider offering a legal way to download shows. the bbc ran a trial of what it calls the interactive media player (imp) last year  which was based on a peer-to-peer distribution model. it let people download programmes it held the rights to up to eight days after they had already aired. it is looking to do a more expansive trial later this year. the bbc already allows radio fans to hear programmes they missed online up to a week after broadcast. about six million people in the uk now have a fast  always-on net connection via cable or phone lines.
digital guru floats sub-$100 pc nicholas negroponte  chairman and founder of mit s media labs  says he is developing a laptop pc that will go on sale for less than $100 (£53).  he told the bbc world service programme go digital he hoped it would become an education tool in developing countries. he said one laptop per child could be   very important to the development of not just that child but now the whole family  village and neighbourhood . he said the child could use the laptop like a text book. he described the device as a stripped down laptop  which would run a linux-based operating system   we have to get the display down to below $20  to do this we need to rear project the image rather than using an ordinary flat panel.   the second trick is to get rid of the fat   if you can skinny it down you can gain speed and the ability to use smaller processors and slower memory.  the device will probably be exported as a kit of parts to be assembled locally to keep costs down. mr negroponte said this was a not for profit venture  though he recognised that the manufacturers of the components would be making money. in 1995 mr negroponte published the bestselling being digital  now widely seen as predicting the digital age. the concept is based on experiments in the us state of maine  where children were given laptop computers to take home and do their work on.  while the idea was popular amongst the children  it initially received some resistance from the teachers and there were problems with laptops getting broken. however  mr negroponte has adapted the idea to his own work in cambodia where he set up two schools together with his wife and gave the children laptops.  we put in 25 laptops three years ago   only one has been broken  the kids cherish these things  it s also a tv a telephone and a games machine  not just a textbook.  mr negroponte wants the laptops to become more common than mobile phones but conceded this was ambitious.  nokia make 200 million cell phones a year  so for us to claim we re going to make 200 million laptops is a big number  but we re not talking about doing it in three or five years  we re talking about months.  he plans to be distributing them by the end of 2006 and is already in discussion with the chinese education ministry who are expected to make a large order.  in china they spend $17 per child per year on textbooks. that s for five or six years  so if we can distribute and sell laptops in quantities of one million or more to ministries of education that s cheaper and the marketing overheads go away.
broadband takes on tv viewing the number of europeans with broadband has exploded over the past 12 months  with the web eating into tv viewing habits  research suggests.  just over 54 million people are hooked up to the net via broadband  up from 34 million a year ago  according to market analysts nielsen/netratings. the total number of people online in europe has broken the 100 million mark. the popularity of the net has meant that many are turning away from tv  say analysts jupiter research. it found that a quarter of web users said they spent less time watching tv in favour of the net  the report by nielsen/netratings found that the number of people with fast internet access had risen by 60% over the past year.  the biggest jump was in italy  where it rose by 120%. britain was close behind  with broadband users almost doubling in a year. the growth has been fuelled by lower prices and a wider choice of always-on  fast-net subscription plans.  twelve months ago high speed internet users made up just over one third of the audience in europe; now they are more than 50% and we expect this number to keep growing   said gabrielle prior  nielsen/netratings analyst.  as the number of high-speed surfers grows  websites will need to adapt  update and enhance their content to retain their visitors and encourage new ones.  the total number of europeans online rose by 12% to 100 million over the past year  the report showed  with the biggest rise in france  italy  britain and germany.  the ability to browse web pages at high speed  download files such as music or films and play online games is changing what people do in their spare time.  a study by analysts jupiter research suggested that broadband was challenging television viewing habits. in homes with broadband  40% said they were spending less time watching tv. the threat to tv was greatest in countries where broadband was on the up  in particular the uk  france and spain  said the report. it said tv companies faced a major long-term threat over the next five years  with broadband predicted to grow from 19% to 37% of households by 2009.  year-on-year we are continuing to see a seismic shift in where  when and how europe s population consume media for information and entertainment and this has big implications for tv  newspaper and radio   said jupiter research analyst olivier beauvillian.
dublin hi-tech labs to shut down dublin s hi-tech research laboratory  media labs europe  is to shut down.  the research centre  which was started by the irish government and the massachusetts institute of technology  was a hotbed for technology concepts. since its opening in 2000  the centre has developed ideas  such as implants for teeth  and also aimed to be a digital hub for start-ups in the area. the centre was supposed to be self-funded  but has failed to attract the private cash injection it needs. in a statement  media labs europe said the decision to close was taken because neither the irish government nor the prestigious us-based massachusetts institute of technology (mit) was willing to fund it. prime minister bertie ahern had wanted to the centre to become a big draw for smaller hi-tech companies  in an attempt to regenerate the area.  about three dozen small firms were attracted to the area  but it is thought the effects of the dot.com recession damaged the labs  long-term survival. the labs needed about 10 million euros (us$13 million) a year from corporate sponsors to survive.  in the end  it was too deep and too long a recession   said simon jones  the labs  managing director. ian pearson  bt s futurologist  told the bbc news website that the closure was a  real shame . bt was just one of the companies that had worked with the labs  looking at rfid tag developments and video conferencing.  there were a lot of very talented  creative people there and they came up with some great ideas that were helping to ensure greater benefits of technology for society.  i have no doubt that the individuals will be quickly snapped up by other research labs  but the synergies from them working as a team will be lost.   noel dempsey  the government s communications minister  said mr ahern had been  very committed  to the project.  he is  i know  very disappointed it has come to this. at the time it seemed to be the right thing to do   he said.  unfortunately the model is not a sustainable one in the current climate.   during its five years  innovative and some unusual ideas for technologies were developed. in recent months  14 patent applications had been filed by the labs. many concepts fed into science  engineering  and psychology as well as technology  but it is thought too few of the ideas were commercially viable in the near-term. several research teams explored how which humans could react with technologies in ways which were entirely different. the human connectedness group  for example  developed the iband  a bracelet which stored and exchanged information about you and your relationships. this information could be beamed to another wearer when two people shook hands. other projects looked at using other human senses  like touch  to interact with devoices which could be embedded in the environment  or on the body itself. one project examined how brainwaves could directly control a computer game. the labs  set up in an old guinness brewery  housed around 100 people  made up of staff  researchers  students  collaborators and part-time undergraduate students. it is thought more than 50 people will lose their jobs when the labs close on 1 february. according to its latest accounts  media lab europe said it spent 8.16 million euros (about us$10.6 million) in 2003 and raised just 2.56 million euros (us$3.3 million).
us woman sues over cartridges a us woman is suing hewlett packard (hp)  saying its printer ink cartridges are secretly programmed to expire on a certain date.  the unnamed woman from georgia says that a chip inside the cartridge tells the printer that it needs re-filling even when it does not. the lawsuit seeks to represent anyone in the us who has purchased an hp inkjet printer since february 2001. hp  the world s biggest printer firm  declined to comment on the lawsuit. hp ink cartridges use a chip technology to sense when they are low on ink and advise the user to make a change.  but the suit claims the chips also shut down the cartridges at a predetermined date regardless of whether they are empty.  the smart chip is dually engineered to prematurely register ink depletion and to render a cartridge unusable through the use of a built-in expiration date that is not revealed to the consumer   the suit said. the lawsuit is asking for restitution  damages and other compensation. the cost of printer cartridges has been a contentious issue in europe for the last 18 months. the price of inkjet printers has come down to as little as £34 but it could cost up to £1 700 in running costs over an 18-month period due to cartridge  a study by computeractive magazine revealed last year. the inkjet printer market has been the subject of an investigation by the uk s office of fair trading (oft)  which concluded in a 2002 report that retailers and manufacturers needed to make pricing more transparent for consumers.
can yahoo dominate next decade  yahoo has reached the grand old age of 10 and  in internet years  that is a long time.  for many  yahoo remains synonymous with the internet - a veteran that managed to ride the dot-com wave and the subsequent crash and maintain itself as one of the web s top brands. but for others there is another  newer net icon threatening to overshadow yahoo in the post dot-com world - google.  the veteran and the upstart have plenty in common - yahoo was the first internet firm to offer initial public shares and google was arguably the most watched ipo (initial public offering) of the post-dot-com era. both began life as search engines although in 2000  when yahoo chose google to power its search facility while it concentrated on its web portal business  it was very much yahoo that commanded press attention. in recent years  the column inches have stacked up in google s favour as the search engine also diversifies with the launch of services such as gmail  its shopping channel froogle and google news.  for jupiter analyst olivier beauvillain  yahoo s initial decision to put its investment on search on hold was an error.  yahoo was busy building a portal and while it was good to diversify they made a big mistake in outsourcing search to google   he said  they thought google would just be a technology provider but it has become a portal in its own right and a direct competitor   he added. he believes yahoo failed to see how crucial search would become to internet users  something it has rediscovered in recent years.  it is interesting that in these last few years  it has refocused on search following the success of google   he said. but for allen weiner  a research director at analyst firm gartner and someone who has followed yahoo s progress since the early years  the future of search is not going to be purely about the technology powering it.  search technology is valuable but the next generation of search is going to be about premium content and the interface that users have to that content   he said. he believes the rivalry between google and yahoo is overblown and instead thinks the real battle is going to be between yahoo and msn. it is a battle that yahoo is currently winning  he believes.  microsoft has amazing assets including software capability and a global name but it has yet to show me it can create a rival product to yahoo   he said.  he is convinced yahoo remains the single most important brand on the world wide web.   i believe yahoo is the seminal brand on the web. if you are looking for a text book definition of web portal then yahoo is it   he said. it has achieved this dominance  mr weiner believes  by a canny combination of acquisitions such as that of inktomi and overture  and by avoiding direct involvement in either content creation or internet access. that is not to say that yahoo hasn t had its dark days. when the dot-com bubble burst  it lost one-third of its revenue in a single year  bore a succession of losses and saw its market value fall from a peak of $120bn to $4.6bn at one point. crucial to its survival was the decision to replace chief executive tim koogle with terry semel in may 2001  thinks mr weiner. his business savvy  coupled with the technical genius of founder jerry yang has proved a winning combination  he says.  so as the internet giant emerges from its first decade as a survivor  how will it fare as it enters its teenage years   the game is theirs to lose and msn is the only one that stands in the way of yahoo s domination   predicted mr weiner. nick hazel  yahoo s head of consumer services in the uk  thinks the fact that yahoo has grown up with the first wave of the internet generation will stand it in good stead. search will be a key focus as will making yahoo messenger available on mobiles  forging new broadband partnerships such as that with bt in the uk and continuing to provide a range of services beyond the desktop  he says. mr weiner thinks yahoo s vision of becoming the ultimate gateway to the web will move increasing towards movies and television as more and more people get broadband access.  it will spread its portal wings to expand into rich media   he predicts.
microsoft seeking spyware trojan microsoft is investigating a trojan program that attempts to switch off the firm s anti-spyware software.  the spyware tool was only released by microsoft in the last few weeks and has been downloaded by six million people. stephen toulouse  a security manager at microsoft  said the malicious program was called bankash-a trojan and was being sent as an e-mail attachment. microsoft said it did not believe the program was widespread and recommended users to use an anti-virus program. the program attempts to disable or delete microsoft s anti-spyware tool and suppress warning messages given to users.  it may also try to steal online banking passwords or other personal information by tracking users  keystrokes.  microsoft said in a statement it is investigating what it called a criminal attack on its software. earlier this week  microsoft said it would buy anti-virus software maker sybari software to improve its security in its windows and e-mail software. microsoft has said it plans to offer its own paid-for anti-virus software but it has not yet set a date for its release. the anti-spyware program being targeted is currently only in beta form and aims to help users find and remove spyware - programs which monitor internet use  causes advert pop-ups and slow a pc s performance.
us top of supercomputing charts the us has pushed japan off the top of the supercomputing chart with ibm s prototype blue gene/l machine.  it is being assembled for the lawrence livermore national laboratory  under the us department of energy. ibm test results show that blue gene/l has managed speeds of 70.72 teraflops. the previous top machine  japan s nec earth simulator  clocked up 35.86. the top 500 list was announced on monday and officially charts the fastest computers in the world.  it is announced every six months and is worked out using an officially recognised mathematical speed test called linpack which measures calculations per second.  once completed in 2005  blue gene/l will be more powerful than its current prototype.  next year with the final blue gene  four times what it is this year  it is going to be a real step up and will be hard to beat   said erich strohmaier  one of the co-founders of the top500 list. it will help scientists work out the safety  security and reliability requirements for the us s nuclear weapons stockpile  without the need for underground nuclear testing. it will also cut down on the amount of heat generated by the massive power  a big problem for supercomputers.  in second place was silicon graphics  columbia supercomputer based at the us space agency s (nasa) ames research center in california. the linux-based machine was reported to have reached a top speed of 42.7 trillion calculations per second (teraflops) in october. it will be used to model flight missions  climate research  and aerospace engineering. the defeated japanese contender  the earth simulator  which was listed in third place  losing the top spot it had held since june 2002. it is dedicated to climate modelling and simulating seismic activity.  since the first supercomputer  the cray-1  was installed at los alamos national laboratory  us  in 1976  computational speed has leaped 500 000 times. the cray-1 was capable of 80 megaflops (80 million operations a second). the blue gene/l machine that will be completed next year will be five million times faster. started in 1993  the top 500 list is decided by a group of computer science academics from around the world. it is presented at the international supercomputer conference in pittsburgh.
nuclear body seeks new tech the computer systems used to monitor the world s nuclear power installations are so outdated that they are hampering the work of inspectors.  a spokesman for the international atomic energy agency (iaea) said its current technology could allow key information to be overlooked as it was more than 20 years old. such systems are the only method of tracking nuclear material worldwide. the agency has appealed for more funds to update its hardware and software.  a major overhaul of the system is needed to allow inspectors immediate  secure online access to information   said project manager livio costantini.  iaea inspectors make around 3 000 visits a year to more than 900 nuclear facilities worldwide. they are there to verify official reports of activities in the plants  to carry out environmental checks  and also to look for any signs that nuclear material is being smuggled in or out of the facility.  the computer system inspectors currently use for comparing data from earlier visits  for instance  was built in the 1970s and largely paper based. an iaea spokesman said this was extremely inefficient and makes searching for anomalies like searching for a needle in a haystack. the organisation is aiming to start a system upgrade in november  aiming to provide inspectors in the field with secure online access to previous inspection data  design blueprints of nuclear facilities  even satellite images of the plant. where possible  it hopes to link the system with national records of the import and export of nuclear materials. further analysis of these could help spot potential smuggling activities or illicit technology transfers between countries  according to a spokesman.  computer specialist at the iaea  peter smith  would like to be able to incorporate state of the art visualisation techniques  more familiar to video games players  into the inspector s toolkit.  the commercials you now see have people are moving around in a virtual world   he said.  if we could have that on our laptops  we could be walking through the plant seeing  on the laptop  how the plant should look.  and if there s a door in the wall that is not on our laptop  then we have a problem.  the iaea estimates the total cost of the four-year project to upgrade its technology will be $40m. so far it has only received $11m from the us and the uk.  failure to replace the hardware and software  and to integrate fully all the information system components will carry large risks   said an agency statement.
china  to overtake us net use  the chinese net-using population looks set to exceed that of the us in less than three years  says a report.  china s net users number 100m but this represents less than 8% of the country s 1.3 billion people. market analysts panlogic predicts that net users in china will exceed the 137 million us users of the net by 2008. the report says that the country s culture will mean that chinese people will use the net for very different ends than in many other nations.  already net use in china has a very different character than in many western nations  said william makower  chief executive of panlogic. in many western nations desktop computers that can access the net are hard to escape at work. by contrast in china workplace machines are relatively rare. this  combined with the relatively high cost of pcs in china and the time it takes to get phone lines installed  helps to explains the huge number of net cafes in china. only 36% of chinese homes have telephones according to reports.  net usage tends to happen in the evening   said mr makower   they get access only when they go home and go off to the internet caf&#233;.   its fundamentally different usage to what we have here   he said.  net use in china was still very much an urban phenomenon with most users living on the country s eastern seaboard or in its three biggest cities. the net is key to helping chinese people keep in touch with friends  said mr makower. many people use it in preference to the phone or arrange to meet up with friends at net cafes. what people can do on the net is also limited by aspects of chinese life. for instance  said mr makower  credit cards are rare in china partly because of fears people have about getting in to debt.  the most popular way to pay is cash-on-delivery   he said   and that s quite a brake to the development of e-commerce.  the arrival of foreign banks in china  due in 2006  could mean greater use of credit cards but for the moment they are rare  said mr makower. but if chinese people are not spending cash online they are interested in the news they can get via the net and the view it gives them on western ways of living.  a large part of the attraction of the internet is that it goes below the radar   he said.  generally it s more difficult for the government to be able to control it.   its real value is as an open window onto what s happening elsewhere in the world   he said. government restrictions on how much advertising can appear on television means that the net is a source of many commercial messages chinese people would not see anywhere else. familiarity with the net also has a certain social cachet.  it s a sign of them having made it that they can use the internet and navigate around it   said mr makower.
napster offers rented music to go music downloading  for those that have rejected the free peer to peer services  can be a costly business.  the cost of paying even as little as 70p per track can add up  particularly for those people who own one of the new generation of players that can store thousands of songs. paying per track for music is becoming as outmoded as paying per minute for internet access and alternative monthly or yearly subscription models are springing up as a more convenient  and ultimately cheaper way of owning music.   music fans are moving away from buying the traditional bundled package of a dozen or more songs that we used to call an album to newer ways that fit their lifestyle; either single tracks or subscriptions services   said paul myers  chief executive of wippit  a uk-based music download service. while itunes is doing good business with its sales of individual tracks to ipod owners  others are questioning whether the concept of owning music is even valid in the digital age. napster is due to launch a new rental subscription service - dubbed napster to go in the uk in the next few months. the service can be used on players that support microsoft windows latest digital rights management technology known as janus. this includes players made by samsung  rio and creative.  currently on offer in beta-version in the us  the service costs $15 per month for unlimited downloads. the technology ensures that music downloaded to the player only remains playable while the user subscribes to the service. users need to update their license on a monthly basis or the tunes will no longer play.  this has outraged some digital music lovers  especially as napster already offers a cheaper service for downloading music to the pc. napster claims the higher price is a result of record labels charging more for the to-go service and says it also offers  greater value  for customers. mr myers is not convinced a rental model will work for consumers.  we ve been offering our unlimited music subscription service for more than three years now and our customers know what they want. format interoperability  excellent value and the reassurance that music purchased from wippit is theirs to keep and enjoy on whatever device they choose   he said.  who wants to download a track that won t play next month if you decide to unsubscribe to the service or change portable player for an ipod or the latest mobile phone   wippit offers a download subscription service for £4.99 per month or £50 per year. it has a catalogue of around 60 000 songs.
sun offers processing by the hour sun microsystems has launched a pay-as-you-go service which will allow customers requiring huge computing power to rent it by the hour.  sun grid costs users $1 (53p) for an hour s worth of processing and storage power on systems maintained by sun. so-called grid computing is the latest buzz phrase in a company which believes that computing capacity is as important a commodity as hardware and software. sun likened grid computing to the development of electricity.  the system could mature in the same way utilities such as electricity and water have developed  said sun s chief operating officer jonathan schwartz.  why build your own grid when you can use ours for a buck an hour   he asked in a webcast launching sun s quarterly network computing event in california. the company will have to persuade data centre managers to adopt a new model but it said it already had interest from customers in the oil  gas and financial services industries.  some of them want to book computing capacity of more than 5 000 processors each  sun said. mr schwartz ran a demonstration of the service  showing how data could be processed in a protein folding experiment. hundreds of servers were used simultaneously  working on the problem for a few seconds each.  although it only took a few seconds  the experiment cost $12 (£6.30) because it had used up 12 hours  worth of computing power. the sun grid relies on solaris  the operating system owned by sun. initially it will house the grid in existing premises and will use idle servers to test software before shipping it to customers. it has not said how much the system will cost to develop but it already has a rival in ibm  which argues that its capacity on-demand service is cheaper than that offered by sun.
consumer concern over rfid tags consumers are very concerned about the use of radio frequency id (rfid) tags in shops  a survey says.  more than half of 2 000 people surveyed said they had privacy worries about the tags  which can be used to monitor stock on shelves or in warehouses. some consumer groups have expressed concern that the tags could be used to monitor shoppers once they had left shops with their purchases. the survey showed that awareness of tags among consumers in europe was low. the survey of consumers in the uk  france  germany and the netherlands was carried out by consultancy group capgemini. the firm works on behalf of more than 30 firms who are seeking to promote the growth of rfid technology. the tags are a combination of computer chip and antenna which can be read by a scanner - each item contains a unique identification number.  more than half (55%) of the respondents said they were either concerned or very concerned that rfid tags would allow businesses to track consumers via product purchases. fifty nine percent of people said they were worried that rfid tags would allow data to be used more freely by third parties. ard jan vetham  capgemini s principal consultant on rfid  said the survey showed that retailers needed to inform and educate people about rfid before it would become accepted technology.  acceptance of new technologies always has a tipping point at which consumers believe that benefits outweigh concerns.  with the right rfid approach and ongoing communication with consumers  the industry can reach this point.  he said that the survey also showed people would accept rfid if they felt that the technology could mean a reduction in car theft or faster recovery of stolen items. the tags are currently being used at one tesco distribution centre in the uk - the tags allow the rapid inventory of bulk items. they are also in use as a passcard for the m6 toll in the midlands  in the uk. mr vetham said the majority of people surveyed (52%) believed that rfid tags could be read from a distance. he said that was a misconception based on a lack of awareness of the technology. at least once consumer group - consumers against supermarket privacy invasion and numbering (caspian) - has claimed that rfid chips could be used to secretly identify people and the things they are carrying or wearing. all kinds of personal belongings  including clothes  could constantly broadcast messages about their whereabouts and their owners  it warned.
gamers snap up new sony psp gamers have bought almost all of the first batch of sony s new playstation portable (psp) games console  which went on sale in japan on sunday.  thousands of people queued for hours to get hold of one of the 200 000 psps which were shipped to retailers. the handheld console can play games  music and movies and goes on sale in europe and north america next year. despite the demand sony said it would not increase the 500 000-strong stock of psps it plans to ship by year s end.  sony says it intends to ship three million of the consoles by march 2005. the company is hoping to challenge the dominance of nintendo in the handheld market. nintendo released its new ds console earlier this year and has already raised shipment targets for the device by 40%. the psp is selling in japan for 19 800 yen ($188; £98) while nintendo s ds console sells in the us and japan for $150 (£78). nintendo s goal is to ship 5 million of its new nintendo ds handheld consoles by march 2005.
musicians  upbeat  about the net musicians are embracing the internet as a way of reaching new fans and selling more music  a survey has found.  the study by us researchers  pew internet  suggests musicians do not agree with the tactics adopted by the music industry against file-sharing. while most considered file-sharing as illegal  many disagreed with the lawsuits launched against downloaders.  even successful artists don t think the lawsuits will benefit musicians   said report author mary madden.  for part of the study  pew internet conducted an online survey of 2 755 musicians  songwriters and music publishers via musician membership organisations between march and april 2004.  they ranged from full-time  successful musicians to artists struggling to make a living from their music.  we looked at more of the independent musicians  rather than the rockstars of this industry but that reflects more accurately the state of the music industry   ms madden told the bbc news website.  we always hear the views of successful artists like the britneys of the world but the less successful artists rarely get represented.  the survey found that musicians were overwhelming positive about the internet  rather than seeing it as just a threat to their livelihood. almost all of them used the net for ideas and inspiration  with nine out of 10 going online to promote  advertise and post their music on the web. more than 80% offered free samples online  while two-thirds sold their music via the net. independent musicians  in particular  saw the internet as a way to get around the need to land a record contract and reach fans directly.  musicians are embracing the internet enthusiastically   said ms madden.  they are using the internet to gain inspiration  sell it online  tracking royalties  learning about copyright.   perhaps surprisingly  opinions about online file-sharing were diverse and not as clear cut as those of the record industry.  through the recording industry association of america (riaa)  it has pursued an aggressive campaign through the courts to sue people suspected of sharing copyrighted music. but the report suggests this campaign does not have the wholehearted backing of musicians in the us. it found that most artists saw file-sharing as both good and bad  though most agreed that it should be illegal.  free downloading has killed opportunities for new bands to break without major funding and backing   said one musician quoted by the report.  it s hard to keep making records if they don t pay for themselves through sales.  however 60% said they did not think the lawsuits against song swappers would benefit musicians and songwriters. many suggested that rather than fighting file-sharing  the music industry needed to recognise the changes it has brought and embrace it.  both successful and struggling musicians were more likely to say that the internet has made it possible for them to make more money from their music  rather than make it harder for them to protect their material from piracy   said ms madden.
slow start to speedy net services faster broadband in the uk is becoming a reality as more internet providers offer super-fast services.  some lucky britons can already take advantage of uk online s 8 megabits per second service  which was launched in november 2004. bt retail has announced that it will trial the same speed service  with a national rollout by year end. other service providers are expected to follow suit and a glut of new voice and video services will follow.   if the bandwidth is there then isps will buy it   said jill finger  a research director at analyst firm idc. others will be watching bt retail s trials  which is initially for employees and later in the summer for customers  with interest. for bt retail  she said  the super-fast service could be a way of differentiating it from other players.  it has been losing market share and this could be one way of gaining some of that back   said ms finger. wanadoo is set to trial an 8mbps service in the summer and also plans to roll out unbundled services - which means it takes over the network from bt - which will provide speeds of up to 15mbps. there is no timetable for this at the moment. cable firms ntl and telewest are also bound to increase bandwidth at some time in the future and  according to an ntl spokesman  are in a better position than bt in the long term.  bt s network is limited compared to that of cable. with all the other services coming on stream such as video on demand  the question is will 8mbps be enough   he asked.
firefox browser takes on microsoft microsoft s internet explorer has a serious rival in the long-awaited firefox 1.0 web browser  which has just been released.  few people get excited when some new software is released  especially when the program is not a game or a music or movie player. but the release of the first full version of firefox has managed to drum up a respectable amount of pre-launch fervour. fans of the software have banded together to raise cash to pay for an advert in the new york times announcing that version 1.0 of the browser is available. the release of firefox 1.0 on 9 november might even cause a few heads to turn at microsoft because the program is steadily winning people away from the software giant s internet explorer browser.  firefox has been created by the mozilla foundation which was started by former browser maker netscape back in 1998. much of the development work done since then has gone into firefox which made its first appearance under this name in february. earlier incarnations  but which had the same core technology  were called phoenix and firebird. since then the software has been gaining praise and converts  not least because of the large number of security problems that have come to light in microsoft s internet explorer. rivals to ie got a boost in late june when two us computer security organisations warned people to avoid the microsoft program to avoid falling victim to a serious vulnerability.  internet monitoring firm websidestory has charted the growing population of people using the firefox browser and says it is responsible for slowly eroding the stranglehold of ie. before july this year  according to websidestory  internet explorer was used by about 95% of web surfers. that figure had remained static for years. in july the ie using population dropped to 94.7% and by the end of october stood at 92.9%. the mozilla foundation claims that firefox has been downloaded almost eight million times and has publicly said it would be happy to garner 10% of the windows- using  net-browsing population. firefox is proving popular because  at the moment  it has far fewer security holes than internet explorer and has some innovations lacking in microsoft s program. for instance  firefox allows the pages of different websites to be arranged as tabs so users can switch easily between them. it blocks pop-ups  has a neat way of finding text on a page and lets you search through the pages you have browsed.  one of the most powerful features of firefox is the many hundreds of extras  or extensions  produced for it. the mozilla foundation is an open source organisation which means that the creators of the browser are happy for others to play around with the core code for the program. this has resulted in many different add-ons or extensions for the browser which now include everything from a version of the familiar google toolbar to a homeland security monitor that keep users aware of current threat levels. firefox  which used to be called firebird and before that phoenix  also has a growing number of vocal net-based fans. a campaign co-ordinated by the spread firefox website attempted to raise the $50 000 needed for a full page advert in the new york times. the campaign set itself a target of recruiting 2500 volunteers. ten days in to the campaign 10 000 people had signed up and now about $250 000 has been raised. the ad is due to run sometime in a three-week period in late november/early december. the surplus cash will be used to help keep the mozilla foundation running. microsoft is facing a growing challenge to ie s hold on the web using population. from alternative browsers such as opera  safari  amaya and even netscape.
ink helps drive democracy in asia the kyrgyz republic  a small  mountainous state of the former soviet republic  is using invisible ink and ultraviolet readers in the country s elections as part of a drive to prevent multiple voting.  this new technology is causing both worries and guarded optimism among different sectors of the population. in an effort to live up to its reputation in the 1990s as  an island of democracy   the kyrgyz president  askar akaev  pushed through the law requiring the use of ink during the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections. the us government agreed to fund all expenses associated with this decision.  the kyrgyz republic is seen by many experts as backsliding from the high point it reached in the mid-1990s with a hastily pushed through referendum in 2003  reducing the legislative branch to one chamber with 75 deputies. the use of ink is only one part of a general effort to show commitment towards more open elections - the german embassy  the soros foundation and the kyrgyz government have all contributed to purchase transparent ballot boxes.  the actual technology behind the ink is not that complicated. the ink is sprayed on a person s left thumb. it dries and is not visible under normal light.  however  the presence of ultraviolet light (of the kind used to verify money) causes the ink to glow with a neon yellow light. at the entrance to each polling station  one election official will scan voter s fingers with uv lamp before allowing them to enter  and every voter will have his/her left thumb sprayed with ink before receiving the ballot. if the ink shows under the uv light the voter will not be allowed to enter the polling station. likewise  any voter who refuses to be inked will not receive the ballot. these elections are assuming even greater significance because of two large factors - the upcoming parliamentary elections are a prelude to a potentially regime changing presidential election in the autumn as well as the echo of recent elections in other former soviet republics  notably ukraine and georgia. the use of ink has been controversial - especially among groups perceived to be pro-government.  widely circulated articles compared the use of ink to the rural practice of marking sheep - a still common metaphor in this primarily agricultural society.  the author of one such article began a petition drive against the use of the ink. the greatest part of the opposition to ink has often been sheer ignorance. local newspapers have carried stories that the ink is harmful  radioactive or even that the ultraviolet readers may cause health problems. others  such as the aggressively middle of the road  coalition of non-governmental organizations  have lauded the move as an important step forward. this type of ink has been used in many elections in the world  in countries as varied as serbia  south africa  indonesia and turkey. the other common type of ink in elections is indelible visible ink - but as the elections in afghanistan showed  improper use of this type of ink can cause additional problems. the use of  invisible  ink is not without its own problems. in most elections  numerous rumors have spread about it.  in serbia  for example  both christian and islamic leaders assured their populations that its use was not contrary to religion. other rumours are associated with how to remove the ink - various soft drinks  solvents and cleaning products are put forward. however  in reality  the ink is very effective at getting under the cuticle of the thumb and difficult to wash off. the ink stays on the finger for at least 72 hours and for up to a week. the use of ink and readers by itself is not a panacea for election ills. the passage of the inking law is  nevertheless  a clear step forward towards free and fair elections.  the country s widely watched parliamentary elections are scheduled for 27 february.  david mikosz works for the ifes  an international  non-profit organisation that supports the building of democratic societies.
rings of steel combat net attacks gambling is hugely popular  especially with tech-savvy criminals.  many extortionists are targeting net-based betting firms and threatening to cripple their websites with deluges of data unless a ransom is paid. but now deep defences are being put in place by some of the uk s biggest net firms to stop these attacks. increasing numbers of attacks and the huge amounts of data being used to try to bump a site off the web are prompting firms to adopt the measures.  net firms are realising that it s not just about anti-virus and firewalls   said paul king  chief security architect at cisco.  there are more things that can be done in the network to protect data centres.  mr king said the only way to properly combat these so-called distributed denial-of-service attacks was with intelligent net-based systems. many of the gambling sites suffering ddos attacks are in offshore data and hosting centres  so any large scale data flood could knock out access to many more sites than just the one the criminals were targeting  said mr king. this overspill effect was only likely to grow as attacks grow in size and scale.  malcolm seagrave  security expert at energis  said the most common types of attacks hit sites with 10 megabytes of data over short periods of time. bigger attacks sending down 200 megabytes of traffic or more were rarely seen  he said.  it does feel like they are turning the dial because you see this traffic gradually growing   he said.  so far there have been no attacks involving gigabytes of data  said mr seagrave. however  he added that it was only a matter of time before such large attacks were mounted. maria capella  spokeswoman for net provider pipex  said that when ddos attacks were at their height  customers were getting hit every four to five days. the defences being put in place constantly monitor the streams of data flowing across networks and pluck out the traffic destined for target sites.  it s about understanding what s genuine traffic and keeping attack traffic from going to the site   she said.  we study the profile of their traffic and as soon as we see an anomaly in the profile that s when we start to get the backbone engineering boys to see if we are going to sustain an attack   said ms capella. this traffic can be hard to spot because ddos attacks typically use thousands of computers in many different countries  each participating machine only sends a small part of the entire data flood.  typically these computers have been infected by a virus or worm which reports its success and the net address of compromised machines back to the malicious hacker or hi-tech criminal that set off the virus. hijacked computers are known as zombies or  bots and collections of them are called  bot nets. many spammers rent out  bot nets to help them anonymously send junk mail.  most of the zombies are based outside the country that hosts the target site so getting the attacking pcs shut off can be difficult. often pipex and other net suppliers do get advance notice that an attack is about to happen.  the serious players tend to precede an attack with some kind of ransom e-mail   said ms capella.  we ask  as part of the service we provide  that customers notify us of anything they have in advance that would give us forewarning.  once an attack is spotted dedicated net hardware takes over to remove the attack traffic and ensure that sites stay up. energis took a similar approach  said mr seagrave.  we have technology out there that allows us to detect attacks in minutes rather than let network engineers spend hours pulling the information together   said mr seagrave. also net firms were starting to work more closely together on the problem of ddos attacks and pool information about where they are coming from. information gathered on attacks and where they originated has led to some arrests. he said energis also did its own intelligence work to get in insight into which sites criminal gangs plan to target.  we have people in places where they shouldn t be  monitoring tech sites   he said. sometimes though  he said  spotting the next victim was easy.  you can see them going alphabetically through the list with the gambling sites  trying one after another   said mr seagrave.
rolling out next generation s net the body that oversees how the net works  grows and evolves says it has coped well with its growth in the last 10 years  but it is just the start.   in a sense  we have hardly started in reaching the whole population   the new chair of the internet engineering task force (ietf)  brian carpenter  says. the ietf ensures the smooth running and organisation of the net s architecture. with broadband take-up growing  services like voice and tv will open up interesting challenges for the net.  i think voip (voice-over internet protocol  allowing phone calls to be made over the net) is very important - it challenges all the old cost models of telecoms   says dr carpenter.  second  it challenges more deeply the business model that you have to be a service provider with a lot of infrastructure. with voip  you need very little infrastructure.   a distinguished ibm engineer  dr carpenter spent 20 years at cern  the european laboratory for particle physics. as the new chair of the ietf  his next big challenge is overseeing ipv6  the next generation standard for information transfer and routing across the web. at cern  dr carpenter helped pioneer advanced net applications during the development of the world wide web  so he is well-placed to take on such a task. the net s growth and evolution depend on standards and protocols  and ensuring the architecture works and talks to other standards is a crucial job of the ietf. the top priority is to ensure that the standards that make the net work  are open and free for anyone to use and work with.  the net is built on a protocol called tcp/ip  which means transmission control protocol  and internet protocol. when computers communicate with the net  a unique ip address is used to send and receive information. the ietf is a large international community of network designers  operators  vendors  and researchers working on the evolution of the net s architecture and the way this information is sent and received. they make sure it all knits together leaving no gaps.  we ve seen some interesting effects over last few years   explains dr carpenter.  the net was growing at a fantastic rate at the end of the 90s. then there was a bit of a glitch in 2000.  we are now seeing a very clear phase of consolidation and renewed growth.   that renewed growth is also being buoyed by emerging economies  like china  which are showing fast uptake of broadband net and other technologies. the number of broadband subscribers via dsl (digital subscriber line) doubled in a year to 13 million  according to figures released at the end of 2004.  the challenges we face are about continuing to produce standards to allow for that growth rate   explained dr carpenter.  given it [the net] was designed for the whole community  it has done well to reach millions. if you want to reach the whole population  you have to make sure it can scale up.  ipv6  the standard that will replace the existing ipv4  will allow for billions more addresses on the net  and it is gradually being worked into network infrastructure across the world.  the actual number of addresses with ipv4 is limited to four billion ip addresses.  that clearly is not enough when you have 10 billion people to serve  so there is technical solution  the new version of ip - ipv6.  it has much larger address space possibilities with no practical limits   said dr carpenter. standards are vital to something as complex as the net  and making sure standards are open and can work with across networks is a big task. the difference this next generation standard  ipv6  will make to the average net user is almost invisible.  our first goal is that it [ipv6] should make no difference - people should not notice a difference.  it is like when the london telephone numbers got longer. a lot of the process will be invisible.  people are usually given an ip address without knowing it.  technically deployment has started and the standards for are just about settled  said dr carpenter.  the one problem with the net that may never disappear completely is security. to dr carpenter  the solution comes out of technological and human behaviour. people have to be educated about  sensible behaviour  he says  such as ignoring e-mails that claim you have won something.   i don t think it is going to get worse. people will remain concerned about security and they probably should do - just as you would be concerned walking along a dark street.  we have to do work to make sure there are better security internet standards. it is a never-ending battle in a sense.  but  he adds:  even if security has improved  you still worry a bit. unfortunately  it is just part of life. we have a duty to do what we can.
satellite mapping aids darfur relief aid workers trying to house  feed and clothe millions of homeless refugees in the sudanese region of darfur are getting a helping hand from advanced mapping technology.  a european consortium of companies and university groups known as respond is working to provide accurate and up to date maps. the aim is to overcome some of the huge logistical challenges in getting supplies to where they are needed. respond is using satellite imagery to produce accurate maps that can be used in the field rapidly.  respond has produced very detailed maps for example for the road networks  for the rivers and for the villages  to more large-scale maps useful for very general planning purposes   said einar bjorgo from unosat  the un satellite mapping organisation that is part of the respond consortium.  the group uses satellites from nasa  the european space agency and the disaster monitoring constellation. the satellite data is transmitted to ground stations. from there  the information makes its way to respond organisations that specialise in interpreting such data.  you have to convert the data into images  then the interpreter has to convert all this into crisis  damage  or situation maps   said stefan voigt  who works in the remote sensing department of one of those organisations  the german aerospace centre.  this kind of detailed analysis usually takes a couple of months but respond gets it done in about 12 hours.  our users are usually not so much familiar with reading satellite imagery  reading satellite maps  so it s our task to transfer the data into information that non-technical people can read and understand easily and very  very efficiently   said mr voigt. respond supplies maps to aid groups via the web  and on compact disc. but the best map is one you can hold in your hands  especially in remote areas where internet connections and laptops are scarce.  a map is a working document   explains herbert hansen of respond s belgian partner keyobs.  you need to use it  you need to write on it  correct  give feedback and so on  so you need paper to write on.  we print maps  we laminate the maps  we encapsulate the maps if needed so you can take a shower with the map  it s completely protected.   humanitarian groups in darfur have been making good use of respond s maps. they have come in especially handy during sudan s rainy season  when normally dry riverbeds  or wadis  became flooded.  these wadis had a very small amount of flooding  generally  in terms of depth  but greatly impeded the transport capabilities and capacities of the humanitarian groups on the ground   says stephen candillon of respond imaging partner sertit. respond s rapid imaging has allowed aid groups to find ways around the wadis  allowing then to mark on their maps which roads were washed out at which times. aid groups say that combination of satellite technology and on-the-ground observation helped keep relief flowing to those who needed it.  clark boyd is technology correspondent for the world  a bbc world service and wgbh-boston co-production
junk e-mails on relentless rise spam traffic is up by 40%  putting the total amount of e-mail that is junk up to an astonishing 90%.  the figures  from e-mail management firm email systems  will alarm firms attempting to cope with the amount of spam in their in-boxes. while virus traffic has slowed down  denial of service attacks are on the increase according to the firm. virus mail accounts for just over 15% of all e-mail traffic analysis by the firm has found.  it is no longer just multi-nationals that are in danger of so-called denial of service attacks  in which websites are bombarded by requests for information and rendered inaccessible. email systems refers to a small uk-based engineering firm  which received a staggering 12 million e-mails in january. the type of spam currently being sent has subtlety altered in the last few months  according to email systems analysis. half of spam received since christmas has been health-related with gambling and porn also on the increase. scam mails  offering ways to make a quick buck  have declined by 40%.  january is clearly a month when consumers are less motivated to purchase financial products or put money into dubious financial opportunities   said neil hammerton  managing director of email systems.  spammers seem to have adapted their output to reflect this  focussing instead on medically motivated and pornographic offers  presumably intentionally intended to coincide with what is traditionally considered to be the bleakest month in the calendar   he said.
tech helps disabled speed demons an organisation has been launched to encourage disabled people to get involved in all aspects of motorsport  which is now increasingly possible thanks to technological innovations.  the motorsport endeavour club left the starting grid yesterday at the autosport international 2005 show at birmingham s nec  with several technologies to adapt vehicles on display.  motorcycle racer  roy tansley  from derby developed his electronic sequential gear changer following an accident which resulted in part of his left leg being amputated.  i needed to find a way of changing gear and generally you do that with your left leg   mr tansley told the bbc news website.  in simple terms  i needed to invent a left foot - initially it was quite a heath robinson device.  mr tansley had to argue his case to be allowed to continue competing with motorcycle racing s governing body  the autocycle union.  at that time they wouldn t let any amputee race at all  but eventually they told me i could have a licence as long as i raced sidecars.  mr tansley s invention  the pro-shift  is designed to work with hewland gearboxes which are widely used in motorcycle racing. in addition to helping disabled riders to compete  mr tansley reckons that the pro-shift saves at least 20 seconds per lap when he competes in the isle of man tt. as a result  there has been considerable interest in the product from other riders keen to improve their performance.  i m not prejudiced  i ll sell to able-bodied people if i have to!  he joked.  another exhibit on the motorsport endeavour stand is a subaru impreza rally car  adapted to accommodate a variety of disabilities. the vehicle belongs to pararallying  the world s only rally school for disabled drivers which is based in lincolnshire.   we use the latest technology supplied by an italian company   said rally driver dave hawkins who runs the company.  the cars have electronic throttles  electronic brakes  electronic clutches - we ve yet to turn anybody away.  mr hawkins - a paraplegic himself - says his customers have included right or left arm amputees  quadriplegics  people who have had strokes and a woman who had had all four limbs amputated. pararallying uses a vauxhall astra gsi with an automatic gearbox and manual subaru imprezas. the car on display is fitted with a  duck clutch  - a switch on the gear stick used instead of the clutch pedal. it also has a second ring behind the steering wheel to operate the throttle and a hand operated brake bar.  when joy rainey started competing in motorsport in 1974 she was continuing the family tradition - her father  murray  is a former australian formula 3 champion.  and it was rainey senior who modified a sports racer to accommodate his daughter s small stature so that she could take part in hill climbs. she uses an ordinary road car by putting extensions on the pedals  a cushion behind her back and raising the seat.  but in a competition car you have to have everything right or you ll lose the balance of the car   she said.  i bring everything back to me - steering wheel  steering column  gear lever and pedals.  when she recently took part in the london to sydney marathon she shared the driving with her partner  trevor  who now does the engineering work. he designed a system for their morris minor so that the adaptations could be totally removed in under a minute. the motorsport endeavour club is hoping that putting such technologies on display will result in more disabled people becoming involved in all areas of the sport and at every level.
camera phones are  must-haves  four times more mobiles with cameras in them will be sold in europe by the end of 2004 than last year  says a report from analysts gartner.  globally  the number sold will reach 159 million  an increase of 104%. the report predicts that nearly 70% of all mobile phones sold will have a built-in camera by 2008. improving imaging technology in mobiles is making them an increasingly  must-have  buy. in europe  cameras on mobiles can take 1.3 megapixel images. but in japan and asia pacific  where camera phone technology is much more advanced  mobiles have already been released which can take 3.2 megapixel images. japan still dominates mobile phone technology  and the uptake there is huge. by 2008  according to gartner  95% of all mobiles sold there will have cameras on them.  camera phones had some teething problems when they were first launched as people struggled with poor quality images and uses for them  as well as the complexity and expense of sending them via mms (multimedia messaging services). this has changed in the last 18 months. handset makers have concentrated on trying to make phones easier to use. realising that people like to use their camera phones in different ways  they have introduced more design features  like rotating screens and viewfinders  removable memory cards and easier controls to send picture messages.  mobile companies have introduced more ways for people to share photos with other people. these have included giving people easier ways to publish them on websites  or mobile blogs - moblogs. but the report suggests that until image quality increases more  people will not be interested in printing out pictures at kiosks. image sensor technology inside cameras phones is improving. the gartner report suggests that by mid-2005  it is likely that the image resolution of most camera phones will be more than two megapixels. consumer digital cameras images range from two to four megapixels in quality  and up to six megapixels on a high-end camera. but a lot of work is being done to make camera phones more like digital cameras. some handsets already feature limited zoom capability  and manufacturers are looking into technological improvements that will let people take more photos in poorly-lit conditions  like nightclubs. other developments include wide-angle modes  basic editing features  and better sensors and processors for recording film clips.  images from camera phones have even made it into the art world. an exhibition next month in aid of the charity mencap  will feature snaps taken from the camera phones of top artists.  the exhibition  fonetography  will feature images taken by photographers david bailey  rankin and nan goldin  and artists sir peter blake  tracey emin and jack vettriano. but some uses for them have worried many organisations. intel  samsung  the uk s foreign office and lawrence livermore national laboratories in the us  have decided to ban camera phones from their buildings for fear of sensitive information being snapped and leaked. many schools  fitness centres and local councils have also banned them over fears about privacy and misuse. italy s information commissioner has also voiced concern and has issued guidelines on where and how the phones can be used. but camera phone fears have not dampened the manufacturers  profits. according to recent figures  sony ericsson s profits tripled in the third-quarter because of new camera phones. over 60% of mobiles sold during the three months through to september featured integrated cameras  it said.
gadget market  to grow in 2005  the explosion in consumer technology is to continue into 2005  delegates at the world s largest gadget show  in las vegas  have been told.  the number of gadgets in the shops is predicted to grow by 11%  while devices which talk to each other will become increasingly important.  everything is going digital   kirsten pfeifer from the consumer electronics association  told the bbc news website. the consumer electronics show (ces) featured the pick of 2005 s products.  consumers are controlling what they want and technologies like hdtvs [high-definition tvs]  digital radio  and digital cameras will remain strong in 2005.  all the products on show really showed the breadth and depth of the industry.  despite showing diversity  some delegates attending complained that the showcase lacked as much  wow factor  as in previous years.  the portable technologies on show also reflected one of the buzzwords of ces  which was the  time and place shifting  of multimedia content - being able to watch and listen to video and music anywhere  at any time. at the start of last year s ces  the cea predicted there would be an average growth of 4% in 2004. that figure was surpassed with the rise in popularity of portable digital music players  personal video recorders and digital cameras. it was clear also that gadgets are becoming a lot more about lifestyle choice  with fashion and personalisation becoming increasingly key to the way gadgets are designed. part of this has been the rise in spending power of the  generation x-ers  who have grown up with technology and who now have the spending power and desire for more devices that suit them. more than 57% of the consumer electronics market is made up of female buyers  according to cea research. hybrid devices  which combine a number of multimedia functions  were also in evidence on the show floor.  a lot of this is driven by just the ability to do it   said stephen baker  a consumer electronics analyst with retail research firm npd group.  some of these functions cost next to nothing to add.   as well as the show floor showcasing everything from tiny wearable mp3 players to giant high-definition tvs  several keynote speeches were made by industry leaders  such as microsoft chief bill gates. despite several embarrassing technical glitches during mr gate s pre-show speech  he announced several new partnerships - mainly for the us market. he unveiled new ways of letting people take tv shows recorded on personal video recorders and watch them back on portable devices. he disappointed some  however  by failing to announce any details of the next generation of the xbox games console. another disappointment was the lack of exposure sony s new portable games device  the psp  had at the show. sony said the much-anticipated gadget would most likely start shipping in march for the us and europe. it went on sale in japan before christmas. there were only two psps embedded in glass cabinets at the show though and no representatives to discuss further details. a sony representative told the bbc news website this was because sony did not consider it to be part of their  consumer technology  offering.  elsewhere at the show  there was a plethora of colour and plasma screens  including samsung s 102-inch (2.6 metre) plasma - the largest in the world. industry experts were also excited about high-definition technologies coming to the fore in 2005  with new formats for dvds coming out which will hold six times as much data as conventional dvds. with so many devices on the move there were a lot of products on show offering external storage  like seagate s 5gb pocket sized external hard drive  which won an innovation for engineering and design prize. more than 120 000 trade professionals attended ces in las vegas  which officially ran from 6 to 9 january.
search wars hit desktop pcs another front in the on-going battle between microsoft and google is about to be opened.  by the end of 2004 microsoft aims to launch search software to find any kind of file on a pc hard drive. the move is in answer to google s release of its own search tool that catalogues data on desktop pcs. the desktop search market is becoming increasingly crowded as google  aol  yahoo and many smaller firms tout programs that help people find files.  microsoft made the announcement about its forthcoming search software during a call to financial analysts to talk about its first quarter results. john connors  microsoft s chief financial officer said a test version of its desktop search software should be available for download by the end of the year.   we re going to have a heck of a great race in search between google  microsoft and yahoo   he said.  it s going to be really fun to follow.  microsoft is coming late to the desktop search arena and its software will have to compare favourably with programs from a large number of rivals  many of which have fiercely dedicated populations of users. the program could be based on the software microsoft owns as a result of its purchase of lookout software in early october. on 14 october google released desktop search software that catalogues all the files on a pc and lets users use one tool to find e-mail messages  spreadsheets  text files and presentations. the software will also find webpages and messages sent via aol instant messenger.  many other firms have released desktop search systems recently too. companies such as blinkx  copernic  enfish x1 technologies and x-friend all do the same job of cataloguing the huge amounts of information that people increasingly store on their desktop or home computer.  apple has also debuted a similar search system for its computers called spotlight that is due to debut with the release of the tiger operating system. due to follow are net giants aol and yahoo. the latter recently bought stata labs to get its hands on search software that people can use. microsoft is also reputedly working on a novel search system for the next version of windows (codenamed longhorn). however this is not likely to appear until 2006.  the recent activity in the search industry shows that there is a need to move beyond simple keyword-based web search   said kathy rittweger  co-founder of blinkx.  finding information of our own computers is becoming as difficult as it is to find the relevant webpage amongst the billions that exist.   desktop search has become important for several reasons. according to research by message analysts the radicati group up to 45% of the information critical to keeping many businesses running sits in e-mail messages and attachments. jf sullivan  spokesman for e-mail software firm sendmail said many organisations were starting to realise how important messaging was to their organisation and the way the work.  the key thing is being able to manage all this information   he said. also search is increasingly key to the way that people get around the internet. many people use a search engine as the first page they go to when getting on the net. many others use desktop toolbars that let them search for information no matter what other program they are using. having a tool on a desktop can be a lucrative way to control where people go online. for companies such as google which relies on revenue from adverts this knowledge about what people are looking for is worth huge amounts of money. but this invasiveness has already led some to ask about the privacy implications of such tools.
global blogger action day called the global web blog community is being called into action to lend support to two imprisoned iranian bloggers.  the month-old committee to protect bloggers  is asking those with blogs to dedicate their sites on 22 february to the  free mojtaba and arash day . arash sigarchi and mojtaba saminejad are both in prison in iran. blogs are free sites through which people publish thoughts and opinions. iranian authorities have been clamping down on prominent sites for some time.  i hope this day will focus people   curt hopkins  director of the committee  told the bbc news website.  the group has a list of actions which it says bloggers can take  including writing to local iranian embassies. the committee has deemed tuesday  free mojtaba and arash day  as part of its first campaign. it is calling on the blogsphere - the name for the worldwide community of bloggers - to do what it can to help raise awareness of the plight of mojtaba and arash as well as other  cyber-dissidents .  if you have a blog  the least you could do is put nothing on that blog except  free mojtaba and arash day    said mr hopkins.  that would mean you could see that phrase 7.1 million times. that alone will shine some light on the situation.  if you don t have one  find one dedicated to that - it takes about 30 seconds.  technorati  a blog search engine  tracks about six million blogs and says that more than 12 000 are added daily. a blog is created every 5.8 seconds  according to a us research think-tank.  the committee to protect bloggers was started by us blogger curt hopkins and counts fired flight attendant blogger ellen simonetti as a deputy director. she has since started the international bloggers  bill of rights  a global petition to protect bloggers at work. although not the only website committed to human rights issues by any means  it aims to be the hub or organisation  information and support for bloggers in particular and their rights to freedom of speech.  the committee  although only a month old  aims to be the focal point for blogger action on similar issues in the future  and will operate as a non-for-profit organisation.  blogging is in this weird no man s land. people think of it as being one thing or another depending on their point of view   said mr hopkins.  some think of themselves as pundits  kind of like journalists  and some like me have a private blog which is just a publishing platform.  but they do not have a constituency and are out there in the cold.   it is not just human rights issues in countries which have a track record of restricting what is published in the media that is of concern to bloggers. the question of bloggers and what rights they have to say what they want on their sites is a thorny one and has received much press attention recently. high profile cases in which employees have been sacked for what they have said on their personal  and often anonymous blogs  have highlighted the muddy situation that the blogsphere is currently in.   this is a big messy argument   explained mr hopkins. he added:  it is just such a new way of doing business  there will be clamp downs.  but the way these issues get tested is through the courts which  said mr hopkins   is part of the whole messy conversation.   if you haven t already got bloggers in your company  you will have them tomorrow - and if you don t have a blogger policy now you had better start looking at having one. mr hopkins said that the blogsphere - which is doubling every five months - was powerful because it takes so little time and expertise to create a blog.  everyone does this - mums  radicals  conservatives   he said. many companies offer easy-to-use services to create a blog and publish it in minutes to a global community.  that is the essential difference. what i call  templating software  gives every single person on earth the chance to have one.  you don t even have to have your own computer.
spam e-mails tempt net shoppers computer users across the world continue to ignore security warnings about spam e-mails and are being lured into buying goods  a report suggests.  more than a quarter have bought software through spam e-mails and 24% have bought clothes or jewellery. as well as profiting from selling goods or services and driving advertising traffic  organised crime rings can use spam to glean personal information. the business software alliance (bsa) warned that people should  stay alert .  many online consumers don t consider the true motives of spammers   said mike newton  a spokesperson for the bsa which commissioned the survey.   by selling software that appears to be legitimate in genuine looking packaging or through sophisticated websites  spammers are hiding spyware without consumers  knowledge.  once the software is installed on pcs and networks  information that is given over the internet can be obtained and abused.   the results also showed that the proportion of people reading - or admitting to reading - and taking advantage of adult entertainment spam e-mails is low  at one in 10. the research  which covered 6 000 people in six countries and their attitudes towards junk e-mails  revealed that brazilians were the most likely to read spam. a third of them read unsolicited junk e-mail and 66% buy goods or services after receiving spam.  the french were the second most likely to buy something (48%)  with 44% of britons taking advantage of products and services. this was despite 38% of people in all countries being worried about their net security because of the amount of spam they get. more than a third of respondents said they were concerned that spam e-mails contained viruses or programs that attempted to collect personal information.  both industry and the media have helped to raise awareness of the issues that surround illegitimate e-mail  helping to reduce the potential financial damage and nuisance from phishing attacks and spoof websites   said william plante  director of corporate security and fraud protection at security firm symantec.  at the same time  consumers need to continue exercising caution and protect themselves from harm with a mixture of spam filters  spyware detection software and sound judgement.
mobiles rack up 20 years of use mobile phones in the uk are celebrating their 20th anniversary this weekend.  britain s first mobile phone call was made across the vodafone network on 1 january 1985 by veteran comedian ernie wise. in the 20 years since that day  mobile phones have become an integral part of modern life and now almost 90% of britons own a handset. mobiles have become so popular that many people use their handset as their only phone and rarely use a landline.  the first ever call over a portable phone was made in 1973 in new york but it took 10 years for the first commercial mobile service to be launched. the uk was not far behind the rest of the world in setting up networks in 1985 that let people make calls while they walked. the first call was made from st katherine s dock to vodafone s head office in newbury which at the time was over a curry house. for the first nine days of 1985 vodafone was the only firm with a mobile network in the uk. then on 10 january cellnet (now o2) launched its service. mike caudwell  spokesman for vodafone  said that when phones were launched they were the size of a briefcase  cost about £2 000 and had a battery life of little more than 20 minutes.   despite that they were hugely popular in the mid-80s   he said.  they became a yuppy must-have and a status symbol among young wealthy business folk.  this was also despite the fact that the phones used analogue radio signals to communicate which made them very easy to eavesdrop on. he said it took vodafone almost nine years to rack up its first million customers but only 18 months to get the second million.  it s very easy to forget that in 1983 when we put the bid document in we were forecasting that the total market would be two million people   he said.  cellnet was forecasting half that.  now vodafone has 14m customers in the uk alone. cellnet and vodafone were the only mobile phone operators in the uk until 1993 when one2one (now t-mobile) was launched. orange had its uk launch in 1994. both newcomers operated digital mobile networks and now all operators use this technology. the analogue spectrum for the old phones has been retired. called global system for mobiles (gsm) this is now the most widely used phone technology on the planet and is used to help more than 1.2 billion people make calls. mr caudwell said the advent of digital technology also helped to introduce all those things  such as text messaging and roaming that have made mobiles so popular.
doors open at biggest gadget fair thousands of technology lovers and industry experts have gathered in las vegas for the annual consumer electronics show (ces).  the fair showcases the latest technologies and gadgets that will hit the shops in the next year. about 50 000 new products will be unveiled as the show unfolds. microsoft chief bill gates is to make a pre-show keynote speech on wednesday when he is expected to announce details of the next generation xbox.  the thrust of this year s show will be on technologies which put people in charge of multimedia content so they can store  listen to  and watch what they want on devices any time  anywhere. about 120 000 people are expected to attend the trade show which stretches over more than 1.5 million square feet. highlights will include the latest trends in digital imaging  storage technologies  thinner flat screen and high-definition tvs  wireless and portable technologies  gaming  and broadband technologies. the show also includes several speeches from key technology companies such as intel  microsoft  and hewlett packard among others.  the story this year remains all about digital and how that is completely transforming and revolutionising products and the way people interact with them   jeff joseph  from the consumer electronics association (cea) told the bbc news website.  it is about personalisation - taking your mp3 player and creating your own playlist  taking your digital video recorder and watch what you want to watch when - you are no longer at the whim of the broadcasters.   consumer electronics and gadgets had a phenomenal year in 2004  according to figures released by ces organisers  the cea  on tuesday. the gadget explosion signalled the strongest growth yet in the us in 2004. shipments of consumer electronics rose by almost 11% between 2003 and 2004. that trend is predicted to continue  according to cea analysts  with wholesale shipments of consumer technologies expected to grow by 11% again in 2005. the fastest-growing technologies in 2004 included blank dvd media  liquid crystal display (lcd) tvs  digital video recorders (dvrs)  and portable music players.  this year we will really begin to see that come to life in what we call place shifting - so if you have your pvr [personal video recorder] in your living room  you can move that content around the house.  some exhibitors will be showcasing how you can take that content anywhere   said mr joseph. he said the products which will be making waves in the next year will be about the  democratisation  of content - devices and technologies that will give people the freedom to do more with music  video  and images. there will also be more focus on the design of technologies  following the lead that apple s ipod made  with ease of use and good looks which appeal to a wider range of people a key concern.  the cea predicted that there would be several key technology trends to watch in the coming year. gaming would continue to thrive  especially on mobile devices  and would reach out to more diverse gamers such as women. games consoles sales have been declining  but the launch of next generation consoles  such as microsoft s xbox and playstation  could buoy up sales. although it has been widely predicted that mr gates would be showcasing the new xbox  some media reports have cast doubt on what he would be talking about in the keynote. some have suggested the announcement may take place at the games developers conference in the summer instead. with more than 52% of us homes expected to have home networks  the cea suggested hard drive boxes - or media servers - capable of storing thousands of images  video and audio files to be accessed through other devices around the home  will be more commonplace. portable devices that combine mobile telephony  digital music and video players  will also be more popular in 2005. their popularity will be driven by more multimedia content and services which will let people watch and listen to films  tv  and audio wherever they are. this means more storage technologies will be in demand  such as external hard drives  and flash memory like sd cards. ces runs officially from 6 to 9 january.
online commons to spark debate online communities set up by the uk government could encourage public debate and build trust  says the institute of public policy research (ippr).  existing services such as ebay could provide a good blueprint for such services  says the think-tank. although the net is becoming part of local and central government  its potential has not yet been fully exploited to create an online  commons  for public debate. in its report  is online community a policy tool   the ippr also asks if id cards could help create safer online communities. adopting an ebay-type model would let communities create their own markets for skills and services and help foster a sense of local identity and connection.  what we are proposing is a civic commons   will davies  senior research fellow at the ippr told the bbc news website.  a single publicly funded and run online community in which citizens can have a single place to go where you can go to engage in diversity and in a way that might have a policy implication - like a pre-legislation discussion.   the idea of a  civic commons  was originally proposed by stephen coleman  professor of e-democracy at the oxford internet institute. the ippr report points to informal  small scale examples of such commons that already exist. it mentions good-practice public initiatives like the bbc s ican project which connects people locally and nationally who want to take action around important issues.  but he adds  government could play a bigger role in setting up systems of trust for online communities too. proposals for id cards  for instance  could also be widened to see if they could be used online. they could provide the basis for a secure authentication system which could have value for peer-to-peer interaction online.  at the moment they have been presented as a way for government to keep tabs on people and ensuring access to public services   said mr davies.  but what has not been explored is how authentication technology may potentially play a role in decentralised online communities.  the key idea to take from systems such as ebay and other online communities is letting members rate each other s reputation by how they treat other members. using a similar mechanism  trust and cooperation between members of virtual and physical communities could be built. this could mean a civic commons would work within a non-market system which lets people who may disagree with one another interact within publicly-recognised rules.  e-government initiatives over the last decade have very much been about putting basic information and service guides online as well as letting people interact with government via the web. many online communities  such as chatrooms  mailing lists  community portals  message boards and weblogs often form around common interests or issues.  with 53% of uk households now with access to the net  the government  suggests mr davies  could act as an intermediary or  middleman  to set up public online places of debate and exchange to encourage more  cosmopolitan politics  and public trust in policy.  government already plays a critical role in helping citizens trade with each other online.  but it should also play a role in helping citizens connect to one another in civic  non-market interactions   said mr davies. there is a role for public bodies like the bbc  libraries  and government to bring people back into public debate again instead of millions of  cliques  talking to each other  he added. the paper is part of the ippr s digital society initiative which is producing a number of conferences and research papers leading up to the publication of a manifesto for a digital britain.
no re-draft  for eu patent law a proposed european law on software patents will not be re-drafted by the european commission (ec) despite requests by meps.  the law is proving controversial and has been in limbo for a year. some major tech firms say it is needed to protect inventions  while others fear it will hurt smaller tech firms the ec says the council of ministers will adopt a draft version that was agreed upon last may but said it would review  all aspects of the directive . the directive is intended to offer patent protection to inventions that use software to achieve their effect  in other words   computer implemented invention .  in a letter  ec president jos&#233; manuel barroso told the president of the european parliament  josep borrell  that the commission  did not intend to refer a new proposal to the parliament and the council (of ministers)  as it had supported the agreement reached by ministers in may 2004.  if the european council agrees on the draft directive it will then return for a second reading at the european parliament. but that will not guarantee that the directive will become law - instead it will probably mean further delays and controversy over the directive. most eu legislation now needs the approval of both parliament and the council of ministers before it becomes law. french green mep alain lipietz warned two weeks ago that if the commission ignored the parliament s request it would be an  insult  to the assembly. he said that the parliament would then reject the council s version of the legislation as part of the final or conciliation stage of the decision procedure. in the us  the patenting of computer programs and internet business methods is permitted.  this means that the us-based amazon.com holds a patent for its  one-click shopping  service  for example. critics are concerned that the directive could lead to a similar model happening in europe. this  they fear  could hurt small software developers because they do not have the legal and financial might of larger companies if they had to fight patent legal action in court. supporters say current laws are inefficient and it would serve to even up a playing field without bringing eu laws in line with the us.
hotspot users gain free net calls people using wireless net hotspots will soon be able to make free phone calls as well as surf the net.  wireless provider broadreach and net telephony firm skype are rolling out a service at 350 hotspots around the uk this week. users will need a skype account - downloadable for free - and they will then be able to make net calls via wi-fi without paying for net access. skype allows people to make free pc-based calls to other skype users.  users of the system can also make calls to landlines and mobiles for a fee. the system is gaining in popularity and now has 28 million users around the world. its paid service - dubbed skype out - has so far attracted 940 000 users. it plans to add more paid services with forthcoming launches of video conferencing  voice mail and skype in  a service which would allow users to receive phone calls from landlines and mobiles. london-based software developer connectotel has unveiled software that will expand the sms functions of skype  allowing users to send text messages to mobile phones from the service. broadreach networks has around two million users and hotspots in places such as virgin megastores  the travelodge chain of hotels and all london s major rail terminals. the company is due to launch wi-fi on virgin trains later in the year.  skype s success at spreading the world about internet telephony is well-known and we are delighted to be offering free access to skype users in our hotspots   commented broadreach chief executive magnus mcewen-king.
concerns over windows atms cash machine networks could soon be more susceptible to computer viruses  a security firm has warned.  the warning is being issued because many banks are starting to use the windows operating system in machines. already there have been four incidents in which windows viruses have disrupted networks of cash machines running the microsoft operating system. but banking experts say the danger is being overplayed and that the risks of infection and disruption are small.  for many years the venerable ibm operating system  known as os/2  has been the staple software used to power many of the 1.4m cash machines in operation around the world. but ibm will end support for os/2 in 2006 which is forcing banks to look for alternatives. there are also other pressures making banks turn to windows said dominic hirsch  managing director of financial analysis firm retail banking research.  he said many cash machines will also have to be upgraded to make full use of the new europay  mastercard and visa credit cards that use computer chips instead of magnetic stripes to store data. us laws that demand disabled people get equal access to information will also force banks to make their cash machines more versatile and able to present information in different ways. todd thiemann  spokesman for anti-virus firm trend micro  said the move to windows in cash machines was not without risks. mr thiemann said research by the towergroup showed that 70% of new cash machines being installed were windows based.  already  he said  there have been four incidents in which cash machines have been unavailable for hours due to viruses affecting the network of the bank that owns them.  in january 2003 the slammer worm knocked out 13 000 cash machines of the bank of america and many of those operated by the canadian imperial bank of commerce. in august of the same year  cash machines of two un-named banks were put out of action for hours following an infection by the welchia worm. incidents like this happen  said mr thiemann  because when banks start using windows cash machines they also change the networking technology used to link the devices to their back office computers. this often means that all the cash machines and computers in a bank share the same data network.  this could mean that cash machines get caught up in the viruses that are going around because they have a common transmission system   he said.  banks need to consider protection as part of the investment to maintain the security of that network   mr thiemann told bbc news online.  but mr hirsch from retail banking research said the number of cash machines actually at risk was low because so few were upgraded every year.  currently  he said  a cash machine has a lifetime of up to 10 years which means that only about 10% of all atms get swapped for a newer model every year.  windows cash machines have been around for several years   he said.  most banks simply upgrade as part of their usual replacement cycle.   in theory there is a bigger threat with windows than os/2   he said   but i do not think that the banks are hugely concerned at the moment.   it s pretty unusual to hear about virus problems with atms   he said. the many different security systems built-in to cash machines meant there was no chance that a virus could cause them to start spitting out cash spontaneously  he said. banks were more likely to be worried about internal networks being overwhelmed by worms and viruses and customers not being able to get cash out at all  he added. a spokesman for the association of payment and clearing services (apacs) which represents the uk s payments industry said the risk from viruses was minimal.  there s no concern that there s going to be any type of virus hitting the uk networks   he said. risks of infection were small because the data networks that connect uk cash machines together and the operators of the atms themselves were a much smaller and tightly-knit community than in the us where viruses have struck.
blinx sequel purrs nicely the original blinx was intended to convert many platform game lovers to microsoft s then new xbox console.  its sharp graphics and novel gameplay  with the main character able to pause  slow  rewind and fast-forward time  were meant to lure many fans to the new machine. but poor design meant the game became a very frustrating affair with players often stranded half-way through a level without the required tools to finish. thankfully  the sequel has fixed many of the original faults. this time around you do not play as blinx but instead you are given the chance to create two unique cat characters and two pig characters.  the character generator is very detailed and a few minutes of tweaking and adjusting will create a unique personality to unleash on the game.  as the game progresses you swap between the two rival factions  pig and feline  assuming the role of your created characters. the thrust of the game sees the two factions competing to recover pieces of a missing time crystal. as in the original  your feline persona can control time  but this time the pigs get to control space. there are a number of puzzles which require control over time to solve while the pigs can create things such as warps  space bubbles and void traps in order to progress. the control over space and time is achieved through a number of vcr-style icons and is quite intuitive.  annoyingly  the puzzles are a little too obviously flagged up and most gamers will find it more of a chore than a challenge to solve them. the game has also tried to emulate franchises such as jak and daxter and ratchet and clank on ps2 and so there are a number of combat elements. these are a little predictable and tend to drag the general polish of the game down to a more dulled affair. but the game s excellent graphics  easily the best-looking platform game around  sound and dollops of humour make it an attractive game for younger platform fans.  blinx 2 is out on xbox now.
half of uk s mobiles  go online  multimedia mobile phones are finally showing signs of taking off  with more britons using them to go online.  figures from industry monitor  the mobile data association (mda)  show the number of phones with gprs and mms technology has doubled since last year. gprs lets people browse the web  access news services  mobile music and other applications like mobile chat. by the end of 2005  the mda predicts that 75% of all mobiles in the uk will be able to access the net via gprs. the mda say the figures for the three months up to 30 september are a  rapid increase  on the figure for the same time the previous year. about 53 million people own a mobile in the uk  so the figures mean that half of those phones use gprs. gprs is often described as 2.5g technology - 2.5 generation - sitting between 2g and 3g technology  which is like a fast  high-quality broadband internet for phones.  with more services being offered by mobile operators  people are finding more reasons to go online via their mobile. downloadable ringtones are still proving highly popular  but so is mobile chat. bandaid was the fastest ever-selling ringtone this year  according to the mda  and chat was given some publicity when prime minister tony blair answered questions through mobile text chat. multimedia messaging services also looked brighter with 32% of all mobiles in the uk able to send or receive picture messages. this is a 14% rise from last september s figures. but a recent report from continental research reflects the continuing battle mobile companies have to actually persuade people to go online and to use mms. it said that 36% of uk camera phone users had never sent a multimedia message  or mms. that was 7% more than in 2003. mobile companies are keen for people to use multimedia functions their phones  like sending mms and going online  as this generates more money for them. but critics say that mms is confusing and some mobiles are too difficult to use. there have also been some issues over interoperability  and being able to send mms form a mobile using one network to a different one.
savvy searchers fail to spot ads internet search engine users are an odd mix of naive and sophisticated  suggests a report into search habits.  the report by the us pew research center reveals that 87% of searchers usually find what they were looking for when using a search engine. it also shows that few can spot the difference between paid-for results and organic ones. the report reveals that 84% of net users say they regularly use google  ask jeeves  msn and yahoo when online.  almost 50% of those questioned said they would trust search engines much less  if they knew information about who paid for results was being hidden. according to figures gathered by the pew researchers the average users spends about 43 minutes per month carrying out 34 separate searches and looks at 1.9 webpages for each hunt. a significant chunk of net users  36%  carry out a search at least weekly and 29% of those asked only look every few weeks. for 44% of those questioned  the information they are looking for is critical to what they are doing and is information they simply have to find.  search engine users also tend to be very loyal and once they have found a site they feel they can trust tend to stick with it. according to pew research 44% of searchers use just a single search engine  48% use two or three and a small number  7%  consult more than three sites. tony macklin  spokesman for ask jeeves  said the results reflected its own research which showed that people use different search engines because the way the sites gather information means they can provide different results for the same query. despite this liking for search sites half of those questioned said they could get the same information via other routes. a small number  17%  said they wouldn t really miss search engines if they did not exist. the remaining 33% said they could not live without search sites. more than two-thirds of those questioned  68%  said they thought that the results they were presented with were a fair and unbiased selection of the information on a topic that can be found on the net. alongside the growing sophistication of net users is a lack of awareness about paid-for results that many search engines provide alongside lists of websites found by indexing the web. of those asked  62% were unaware that someone has paid for some of the results they see when they carry out a search. only 18% of all searchers say they can tell which results are paid for and which are not. said the pew report:  this finding is ironic  since nearly half of all users say they would stop using search engines if they thought engines were not being clear about how they presented paid results.  commenting mr macklin said sponsored results must be clearly marked and though they might help with some queries user testing showed that people need to be able to spot the difference.
remote control rifle range debuts soon you could go hunting via the net.  a texas company is considering letting web users use a remote-controlled rifle to shoot down deer  antelope and wild pigs. for a small fee users will take control of a camera and rifle that they can use to spot and shoot the game animals as they roam around a 133-hectare texas ranch. the live-shot website behind the scheme already lets people practise shooting at targets via the internet.  john underwood  the man behind the live-shot website  said the idea for the remote-control hunting came to him a year ago when he was watching deer via a webcam on another net site.  we were looking at a beautiful white-tail buck and my friend said  if you just had a gun for that . a little light bulb went off in my head   mr underwood told the reuters news agency. a year s work and $10 000 has resulted in a remote-controlled rig on which sits a camera and .22 calibre rifle. mr underwood is planning to put one of these rigs in a concealed location in a small reserve on his texas ranch and let people shoot at a variety of game animals. also needed is a fast net connection so remote hunters can quickly track and aim at passing game animals with the camera and rifle rig. each remote hunting session will cost $150 with additional fees for meat processing and taxidermy work. species that can be shot will include barbary  corsican and mouflon sheep  blackbuck antelope and wild pigs. already the live-shot site lets people shoot 10 rounds at paper and silhouette targets for $5.95 for each 20-minute shooting session. for further fees  users can get the target they shot and a dvd recording of their session. handlers oversee each shooting session and can stop the gun being fired if it is being aimed off-range or at something it should not be. mr underwood said that internet hunting could be popular with disabled hunters unable to get out in the woods or distant hunters who cannot afford a trip to texas. in a statement the rspca said it had  grave concerns  about people being allowed to go online and remotely control a rifle.  we assume it would be extremely difficult to accurately control a gun in this way and therefore it would be difficult to ensure a  clean kill   something the rspca accepts is the intention of those shooting for sport   it said.  animals hit but not killed would without doubt be caused to suffer unnecessarily   said the statement. mike berger  wildlife director of the texas parks and wildlife department  said current hunting statutes did not cover net or remote hunting. he said state laws on hunting only covered  regulated animals  such as native deer and bird species. as such there was nothing to stop mr underwood letting people hunt  unregulated  imported animals and wild pigs. mr underwood also lets people come in person to the ranch to hunt and shoot game animals.
spam e-mails tempt net shoppers computer users across the world continue to ignore security warnings about spam e-mails and are being lured into buying goods  a report suggests.  more than a quarter have bought software through spam e-mails and 24% have bought clothes or jewellery. as well as profiting from selling goods or services and driving advertising traffic  organised crime rings can use spam to glean personal information. the business software alliance (bsa) warned that people should  stay alert .  many online consumers don t consider the true motives of spammers   said mike newton  a spokesperson for the bsa which commissioned the survey.   by selling software that appears to be legitimate in genuine looking packaging or through sophisticated websites  spammers are hiding spyware without consumers  knowledge.  once the software is installed on pcs and networks  information that is given over the internet can be obtained and abused.   the results also showed that the proportion of people reading - or admitting to reading - and taking advantage of adult entertainment spam e-mails is low  at one in 10. the research  which covered 6 000 people in six countries and their attitudes towards junk e-mails  revealed that brazilians were the most likely to read spam. a third of them read unsolicited junk e-mail and 66% buy goods or services after receiving spam.  the french were the second most likely to buy something (48%)  with 44% of britons taking advantage of products and services. this was despite 38% of people in all countries being worried about their net security because of the amount of spam they get. more than a third of respondents said they were concerned that spam e-mails contained viruses or programs that attempted to collect personal information.  both industry and the media have helped to raise awareness of the issues that surround illegitimate e-mail  helping to reduce the potential financial damage and nuisance from phishing attacks and spoof websites   said william plante  director of corporate security and fraud protection at security firm symantec.  at the same time  consumers need to continue exercising caution and protect themselves from harm with a mixture of spam filters  spyware detection software and sound judgement.
mobiles rack up 20 years of use mobile phones in the uk are celebrating their 20th anniversary this weekend.  britain s first mobile phone call was made across the vodafone network on 1 january 1985 by veteran comedian ernie wise. in the 20 years since that day  mobile phones have become an integral part of modern life and now almost 90% of britons own a handset. mobiles have become so popular that many people use their handset as their only phone and rarely use a landline.  the first ever call over a portable phone was made in 1973 in new york but it took 10 years for the first commercial mobile service to be launched. the uk was not far behind the rest of the world in setting up networks in 1985 that let people make calls while they walked. the first call was made from st katherine s dock to vodafone s head office in newbury which at the time was over a curry house. for the first nine days of 1985 vodafone was the only firm with a mobile network in the uk. then on 10 january cellnet (now o2) launched its service. mike caudwell  spokesman for vodafone  said that when phones were launched they were the size of a briefcase  cost about £2 000 and had a battery life of little more than 20 minutes.   despite that they were hugely popular in the mid-80s   he said.  they became a yuppy must-have and a status symbol among young wealthy business folk.  this was also despite the fact that the phones used analogue radio signals to communicate which made them very easy to eavesdrop on. he said it took vodafone almost nine years to rack up its first million customers but only 18 months to get the second million.  it s very easy to forget that in 1983 when we put the bid document in we were forecasting that the total market would be two million people   he said.  cellnet was forecasting half that.  now vodafone has 14m customers in the uk alone. cellnet and vodafone were the only mobile phone operators in the uk until 1993 when one2one (now t-mobile) was launched. orange had its uk launch in 1994. both newcomers operated digital mobile networks and now all operators use this technology. the analogue spectrum for the old phones has been retired. called global system for mobiles (gsm) this is now the most widely used phone technology on the planet and is used to help more than 1.2 billion people make calls. mr caudwell said the advent of digital technology also helped to introduce all those things  such as text messaging and roaming that have made mobiles so popular.
gadgets galore on show at fair the 2005 consumer electronics show in las vegas is a geek s paradise with more than 50 000 new gadgets and technologies launched during the four-day event.  top gadgets at the show are highlighted in the innovations showcase  which recognises some of the hottest developments in consumer electronics. the bbc news website took an early pre-show look at some of those technologies that will be making their debut in 2005.      one of the key issues for keen gadget users is how to store all their digital images  audio and video files. the 2.5gb and 5gb circular pocket hard drive from seagate might help. the external usb drive won a ces best innovations design and engineering award and is small enough to slip into a pocket.  it is the kind of storage that appeals to people who want their pcs to look cool   said seagate.  it is all about style but it also has lots of functionality.   it is the first time you can say a hard drive is sexy   it said. in the centre of the device is a blue light that flashes while data is being written to ensure users do not unplug it when it is busy saving those precious pictures.      universal electronics  nevosl is a universal controller that lets people use one device to get at their multimedia content  such as photos  no matter where it is in their house. it can also act as a remote for home theatre and stereo systems. working with home broadband networks and pcs  the gadget has built-in wireless and a colourful  simple interface. paul arling  uei chief  said consumers face real problems when trying to get at all the files they own that are typically spread across several different devices. he said the nevo gave people a simple  single way to regain some control over digital media in the home. the nevo won two awards at ces  one as a girl s best friend award and another for innovation  design and engineering. the gadget is expected to go on sale before the summer and will cost about $799 (£425).      hotseat is targeting keen gamers with money to spend with its solo chassis gaming chair. the specially-designed chair lets gamers play in surround-sound while stretching out in their own  space . it is compatible with all the major games consoles  dvd players and pcs.  we found that kids love playing in surround sound   said jay leboff from hotseat.  we are looking at offering different types of seats  depending on the market success of this one.  the chair also lets people experience surround sound while watching videos  with wireless control for six surround sound speakers. and a drinks holder. the chair  which looks like a car seat on a skeletal frame  should go on sale in april and is expected to cost $399 (£211).      satellite radio is big business in the us. in the uk  the digital radio technology is known as dab and works on slightly different technology. eton corporation s porsche designed p7131 digital radio set will be launched both as a dab radio in the uk as well as a satellite radio set in the us. dab sets have been slow to take-off in the uk  but this one concentrates on sleek looks as much as technology.  it is for the risqu&#233; consumer   said an eton spokesperson.  we are proud of it because it has the sound quality for the audiophile and the looks for the design-conscious consumer.  the porsche radio is set to go on sale at the end of january in the us and in the first quarter of 2005 in the uk. in the us is it expected to cost $250 (£133).      the average person has a library of 600 digital images estimates the consumer electronics association  the organisation behind ces. this is expected to grow to a massive 3 420 images - or 7.2gb - in five years  time. one gadget that might help swell that collection is sanyo s tiny handheld vpc-c4 camcorder which is another innovation in design and engineering award winner. it combines high quality video and stills in a very small device. it takes mpeg4 video quality at 30 frames a second and has a four megapixel still camera. images and video are stored on sd cards  which have come down in price in recent months. a 512mb card will store about 30 minutes of video and 420 stills. the device is so tiny it can be controlled with one thumb. because images and video are stored on sd memory  it is portable to other devices and means other data like audio can be stored on the card too.      wearable technology has always promised much but failed to deliver because of lack of storage capability and poor design. mpio s tiny digital usb music players come in an array of fashionable colours  taking a leaf out of the apple ipod mini book of design and reflecting the desire for gadgets that look good. slung on a cord  the player would not look too geeky dangling discreetly from the neck. although the pendant design was launched three months ago  the device emphasises large storage as well as good looks for fashion-conscious gadget fiends. an even dinkier model  the fy500  comes out in may and will store about 256mb of music. the range of players recently won an international forum design award 2005.
the pirates with no profit motive two men who were part of a huge network of internet software pirates  known as drink or die  have been convicted at the old bailey. bbc news investigates how the network worked and what motivated those involved.  they called themselves drink or die (dod). they were a network of computer buffs who derived pleasure from cracking codes protecting copyrighted software such as windows 95. they would then share it with each other. there is no suggestion any of them profited financially. but the authorities in both britain and the united states considered it software piracy and took a dim view of networks such as dod  one of a number of so-called warez organisations operating on the internet. in october 2000 the us customs service began an investigation into dod and other networks  such as razor 1911  risciso  myth and popz.  fourteen months later us customs co-ordinated a series of raids across the globe as part of operation buccaneer. seventy search warrants were executed in the us  britain  australia  norway  sweden and finland. at least 60 people were arrested worldwide - 45 of them in the us. among the leaders of the network were americans john sankus - known by his internet nickname eriflleh (hellfire spelt backwards) - richard berry  kent kartadinata and christopher tresco  who used a server based at the prestigious massachusetts institute of technology (mit).  the longest jail sentence - 46 months - was handed down to sankus  a 28-year-old from philadelphia. us attorney paul mcnulty said at the time:  john sankus and his techno-gang operated in the faceless world of the internet and thought they would never be caught.  they were wrong. these sentences  and those to follow  should send a message to others entertaining similar beliefs of invincibility.  but one man still in legal limbo is british-born australian hew raymond griffiths  who is still fighting against extradition to the us.  us customs claimed mr griffiths was one of dod s leaders but his lawyer  antony townsden  told the bbc news website it was a laughable suggestion and added:  he was living on welfare and had such an old computer that he couldn t even download software.  the allegation that he was the group s co-leader is illusory. he had the least technical skills of anyone  he couldn t crack any codes and he has only been called a leader because he was a loudmouth who wrote a lot on their messageboard.  mr townsden said if he had committed any crimes he should be prosecuted in australia  not the us. he claimed the australian government s decision to accept the extradition request was typical of their current  acquiescent  attitude to the us.  mr griffiths is expecting to hear this week the outcome of his appeal against the decision to extradite him. those involved would give themselves internet aliases which would act in the same way as tags used by graffiti artists. they could then brag about their code-cracking abilities without giving away their real identities. alex bell  whose trial at the old bailey ended on friday  was known as mr 2940 - after a computer device - while his co-defendant steven dowd s nickname  curiously  was tim.  a spokesman for us immigration  customs and enforcement  dean boyd  said dod did not appear to be motivated by money. their motivation was the kudos which surrounded being able to crack sophisticated software. he told the bbc news website:  primarily they were just interested in how fast they could crack the code. it was all about underground notoriety.  but mr boyd pointed out that once the software had been distributed on the internet it fell into the hands of organised criminals who were able to mass produce pirated software at zero cost.   it cost us industries a lot of money  billions of dollars   he said. mr boyd said:  it was truly global in scope. we raided a number of universities  including duke (in north carolina) and mit  and found that several of the people involved were employed by major computer corporations.  they would go home from work in the evenings and get involved in this warez culture.  warez groups  which began to surface in the early 1990s  operate according to a strict code of honour.  for example if one group cracked the software first its rivals would respect that achievement and not seek to claim it themselves. mr boyd said the destruction of dod was a great coup but he added:  i m not going to sit here and say we have sorted the problem. there are still hackers and people who do this for fun.  internet piracy of computer software remains a gigantic problem.  a spokesman for the business software alliance said:  dod members claim they did not profit at all. but they did profit by getting access to very expensive servers.  he said dod and other warez groups were fostering a  culture of piracy  on the internet. he said 29% of computer software in britain was believed to have been pirated and this cost £1bn in revenue for software companies  their suppliers and distributors.  it may seem like a victimless crime but it touches more people than you might care to believe.
looks and music to drive mobiles mobile phones are still enjoying a boom time in sales  according to research from technology analysts gartner.  more than 674 million mobiles were sold last year globally  said the report  the highest total sold to date. the figure was 30% more than in 2003 and surpassed even the most optimistic predictions  gartner said. good design and the look of a mobile  as well as new services such as music downloads  could go some way to pushing up sales in 2005  said analysts. although people were still looking for better replacement phones  there was evidence  according to gartner  that some markets were seeing a slow-down in replacement sales.   all the markets grew apart from japan which shows that replacement sales are continuing in western europe   mobile analyst carolina milanesi told the bbc news website.  japan is where north america and western european markets can be in a couple of years  time.  they already have tv  music  ringtones  cameras  and all that we can think of on mobiles  so people have stopped buying replacement phones.   but there could be a slight slowdown in sales in european and us markets too  according to gartner  as people wait to see what comes next in mobile technology. this means mobile companies have to think carefully about what they are offering in new models so that people see a compelling reason to upgrade  said gartner. third generation mobiles (3g) with the ability to handle large amounts of data transfer  like video  could drive people into upgrading their phones  but ms milanesi said it was difficult to say how quickly that would happen.  at the end of the day  people have cameras and colour screens on mobiles and for the majority of people out there who don t really care about technology the speed of data to a phone is not critical.  nor would the rush to produce two or three megapixel camera phones be a reason for mobile owners to upgrade on its own. the majority of camera phone models are not at the stage where they can compete with digital cameras which also have flashes and zooms.  more likely to drive sales in 2005 would be the attention to design and aesthetics  as well as music services. the motorola razr v3 phone was typical of the attention to design that would be more commonplace in 2005  she added. this was not a  women s thing   she said  but a desire from men and women to have a gadget that is a form of self-expression too. it was not just about how the phone functioned  but about what it said about its owner.  western europe has always been a market which is quite attentive to design   said ms milanesi.   people are after something that is nice-looking  and together with that  there is the entertainment side.  this year music will have a part to play in this.  the market for full-track music downloads was worth just $20 million (£10.5 million) in 2004  but is set to be worth $1.8 billion (£94 million) by 2009  according to juniper research. sony ericsson just released its walkman branded mobile phone  the w800  which combines a digital music player with up to 30 hours  battery life  and a two megapixel camera. in july last year  motorola and apple announced a version of itunes online music downloading service would be released which would be compatible with motorola mobile phones. apple said the new itunes music player would become motorola s standard music application for its music phones. but the challenge will be balancing storage capacity with battery life if mobile music hopes to compete with digital music players like the ipod. ms milanesi said more models would likely be released in the coming year with hard drives. but they would be more likely to compete with the smaller capacity music players that have around four gigabyte storage capacity  which would not put too much strain on battery life.
gizmondo gadget hits the shelves the gizmondo combined media player  phone and gaming gadget goes on sale on saturday.  priced at £229  the handheld device is debuting in the uk and goes on sale in the us and mainland europe in the next few weeks. a catalogue of about 20 games is being prepared for the gadget including the great escape and conflict vietnam. the british-backed gadget faces stiff competition from handheld gaming devices made by nintendo and sony.  the gizmondo device packs a lot of functions inside its black cover and is aimed at gamers and those that want more from their game-playing gadgets.  it can be used to play games  music tracks and movies. it can take and store digital photos and be used like a mobile phone to send text  multimedia and e-mail messages. the phone service to enable people to send messages is being provided by pre-pay vodafone accounts bundled in with the device. it also works with gps (global position system) so can also be used as a navigation aid or to support a variety of location-based services. the gprs and bluetooth wireless data systems onboard mean that it can be used for multi-player gaming. the gadget will be available from the gizmondo store on london s regent street and from several other retail partners. although the device rolls together an impressive list of functions  it will face serious competition from three established names in mobile gaming: nintendo  nokia and sony.  the main competition is likely to come from nintendo and sony. nintendo s ds handheld went on sale on 11 march and priced at £99 costs far less than the gizmondo. it also has a ready pool of fans of earlier nintendo handhelds to draw on. in the first two days it was on sale in europe the 87 000 ds handhelds were sold - a better debut than the gamecube enjoyed. sony s psp was due to make its european debut in march but now this is likely to be delayed by a few months. the psp is due to go on sale in the us later this month and a bundle including the player  accessories and a copy of spiderman 2 is expected to cost about $250 (£129). the psp can also play music and movies and supports wireless multiplayer gaming. nokia s n-gage could also be a competitor on the telecommunications side. this too crams a fully functional phone into a gadget that also plays games.
bbc web search aids odd queries the bbc s online search engine was used a record amount in 2004  helping with enquires both simple and strange.  more than 277 million enquiries were made  asking for informaton of a wide range of subjects. the most requested search terms of 2004 included games  eastenders  cbbc  john peel  harry potter and olympics. but there were many strange enquiries  including: what is a dog   how do you say basketball  and what is the biggest collection of naval fluff  the search engine works by matching key words typed in to different web pages but many people still type in natural language questions. here are some of the strangest queries of 2004 - spelling and grammar errors left untouched - and their possible solutions:    - how to fold a serviette like an elf s boot        - how do i structure a french letter        - what is better one long vacation each year or several short vacations throughout the year        - what is so special about the swiss        - what are the contemporary issue in nurses        - what is the number 4 in this number 40052308090        - what is up        - what is the name of james martin s dog      search engines are key to the way people use the internet. companies such as google have become of paramount importance as they dictate how people travel through websites while online.
california sets fines for spyware the makers of computer programs that secretly spy on what people do with their home pcs could face hefty fines in california.  from 1 january  a new law is being introduced to protect computer users from software known as spyware. the legislation  which was approved by governor arnold schwarzenegger  is designed to safeguard people from hackers and help protect their personal information. spyware is considered by computer experts to be one of the biggest nuisance and security threats facing pc users in the coming year. the software buries itself in computers and can collect a wide range of information. at its worst  it has the ability to hijack personal data  like passwords  login details and credit card numbers. the programs are so sophisticated they change frequently and become impossible to eradicate.  one form of spyware called adware has the ability to collect information on a computer user s web-surfing. it can result in people being bombarded with pop-up ads that are hard to close. in washington  congress has been debating four anti-spyware bills  but california is a step ahead. the state s consumer protection against spyware act bans the installation of software that takes control of another computer. it also requires companies and websites to disclose whether their systems will install spyware. consumers are able to seek up to $1 000 in damages if they think they have fallen victim to the intrusive software. the new law marks a continuing trend in california towards tougher privacy rights. a recent survey by earthlink and webroot found that 90% of pcs are infested with the surreptitious software and that  on average  each one is harbouring 28 separate spyware programs. currently users wanting protection from spyware have turned to free programs such as spybot and ad-aware.
xbox power cable  fire fear  microsoft has said it will replace more than 14 million power cables for its xbox consoles due to safety concerns.  the company said the move was a  preventative step  after reports of fire hazard problems with the cables. it affects xboxes made before 23 october 2003 for all regions but mainland europe - and consoles in that region made before 13 january 2004. microsoft said it had received 30 reports of minor injury or property damage due to faulty cables. the firm said fewer than one in 10 000 consoles had experienced component failures. the recall affects almost three quarters of all xboxes sold around the world since its launch in 2001.  in a statement  it added:  in almost all instances  any damage caused by these failures was contained within the console itself or limited to the tip of the power cord at the back of the console.  but in seven cases  customers reported sustaining a minor burn to their hand. in 23 cases  customers reported smoke damage  or minor damage to a carpet or entertainment centre.  this is a preventative step we re choosing to take despite the rarity of these incidents   said robbie bach  senior vice president  microsoft home and entertainment division.  we regret the inconvenience  but believe offering consumers a free replacement cord is the responsible thing to do.  consumers can order a new cable from the xbox website or by telephoning 0800 028 9276 in the uk. microsoft said customers would get replacement cords within two to four weeks from the time of order. it advised users to turn off their xboxes when not in use. a follow-up to xbox is expected to released at the end of this year or the beginning of 2006.
gamers could drive high-definition tv  films  and games have been gearing up for some time now for the next revolution to transform the quality of what is on our screens.  it is called high-definition - hd for short - and it is already hugely popular in japan and the us. it is set  according to analysts  to do for images what cds did for sound. different equipment able to receive hd signals is needed though and is expensive. but europe s gamers may be the early adopters to drive demand. europeans will have to wait until at least 2006 until they see mainstream hdtv.  to view it  it needs to be transmitted in hd format  and people need special receivers and displays that can handle the high-quality resolution. the next generation of consoles  however  are expected to start appearing at the end of 2005  start of 2006. and most new computer displays and plasma sets are already capable of handling such high-resolution pictures.  in the next generation [of consoles] hd support is mandatory   dr mark tuffy games systems director at digital content firm thx told the bbc news website.  every game is going to be playable in hd.  so consumers who have gone out and spent all this money on hdtvs  and who have no content to watch  are going to be blown away by these really high-detail pictures.  it s going to change really the way they look at gaming.   at the end of last year  chris deering  sony s european president  made a prediction that 20 million european households would have hdtv sets by 2008. a previous prediction from analysts datamonitor put the figure at 4.6 million by 2008  an increase from an estimated 50 000 sets at the end of 2003. but those in europe may see little point in buying what is quite an expensive bit of technology - about £2 000 - if there are few programmes or films to watch on them. satellite broadcaster bskyb is planning hdtv services in 2006 and the bbc intends to produce all of its content in hd by 2010.  until broadcast rights  format standards - and the practicalities of updating equipment - are agreed  tv content will be limited. all tv images are made up of pixels which go across the screen  and scan lines which go down the screen. most standard uk tv pictures are made up of 625 lines and about 700 pixels. hd offers up to 1 080 active lines  with each line made up of 1 920 pixels. this means the picture is up to six times as sharp as standard tv.  probably  in the uk [gaming] is going to be the only thing you are going to really be able to show off  as in  look what this tv can do   until hd is really adopted by broadcasters   explains dr tuffy. but gamers are also the ideal target audience for hd because they always crave better quality graphics  and more immersive gaming experiences. they are used to spending money on hardware to match a game s requirements. demographics have changed too and the  sweet spot  for the games industry is the gamer in his or her late 20s. this means they are likely to have higher disposable incomes and can afford the price of big-screen  high-definition display technologies and hd projectors  earlier than others.  higher capacity storage discs  such as hd-dvd and blue-ray   are set to be standard in the next round of games consoles - allowing developers more room for detailed graphics.  for console developers though  hd offers some production changes. it could make games production slightly more expensive  thinks dr tuffy.  but we may see the cross-platform development of games becoming more common because they will more easily be able to take a pc game and apply it to a console   he says.  you are literally going to get to the point  with a lord of the rings game for example  is going to be closer and closer to the actual film  especially the cgi stuff from the dvd.  and the transition when they move from a cut scene to the game  just now they have almost got it seamless.  with hd  he says  the transition will be completely seamless and the same quality as the big-screen cinema release. this could herald an increasing convergence between the film and gaming industry. but it may not be until the generation after the next games consoles where the two industries really collide. at that point  says dr tuffy  games could become more or less interactive movies.
a decade of good website design the web looks very different today than it did 10 years ago.  back in 1994  yahoo had only just launched  most websites were text-based and amazon  google and ebay had yet to appear. but  says usability guru dr jakob nielsen  some things have stayed constant in that decade  namely the principles of what makes a site easy to use. dr nielsen has looked back at a decade of work on usability and considered whether the 34 core guidelines drawn up back then are relevant to the web of today.  roughly 80% of the things we found 10 years ago are still an issue today   he said.  some have gone away because users have changed and 10% have changed because technology has changed.   some design crimes  such as splash screens that get between a user and the site they are trying to visit  and web designers indulging their artistic urges have almost disappeared  said dr nielsen.   but there s great stability on usability concerns   he told the bbc news website. dr nielsen said the basic principles of usability  centring around ease of use and clear thinking about a site s total design  were as important as ever.  it s necessary to be aware of these things as issues because they remain as such   he said. they are still important because the net has not changed as much as people thought it would.  a lot of people thought that design and usability was only a temporary problem because broadband was taking off   he said.  but there are a very small number of cases where usability issues go away because you have broadband.   dr nielsen said the success of sites such as google  amazon  ebay and yahoo showed that close attention to design and user needs was important.  those four sites are extremely profitable and extremely successful   said dr nielsen  adding that they have largely defined commercial success on the net.   all are based on user empowerment and make it easy for people to do things on the internet   he said.  they are making simple but powerful tools available to the user.  none of them have a fancy or glamorous look   he added  declaring himself surprised that these sites have not been more widely copied. in the future  dr nielsen believes that search engines will play an even bigger part in helping people get to grips with the huge amount of information online.  they are becoming like the operating system to the internet   he said. but  he said  the fact that they are useful now does not meant that they could not do better. currently  he said  search sites did not do a very good job of describing the information that they return in response to queries. often people had to look at a website just to judge whether it was useful or not. tools that watch the behaviour of people on websites to see what they actually find useful could also help refine results. research by dr nielsen shows that people are getting more sophisticated in their use of search engines. the latest statistics on how many words people use on search engines shows that  on average  they use 2.2 terms. in 1994 only 1.3 words were used.  i think it s amazing that we have seen a doubling in a 10-year period of those search terms   said dr nielsen.  you can hear more from jakob nielsen and web design on the bbc world service programme  go digital
eu software patent law delayed controversial new eu rules for the patenting of computer-based inventions have been put on hold due to a last minute intervention from poland.  poland - a large and therefore crucial eu member - has requested more time to consider the issue  especially as it relates to the patenting of software. critics say the law would favour large companies over small  innovative ones. they say it could have massive ramifications for developments such as open source software.  polish ministers want to see the phrasing of the text of the directive on the patentability of computer-implemented inventions changed so that it excludes the patenting of software. the planned law has ignited angry debate about whether the eu should allow the patenting of computer programs and internet business methods as currently happens in the us. so  for instance  us-based amazon.com holds a patent on  one-click shopping . critics claim the law  which the eu says is needed to harmonise with the us  is little more than a law on ideas.  patent rights  it is claimed  protect inventors but in this case it is exclusively the interests of the big companies that are protected   eva lichtenberg  a austrian green member of the european parliament said in a statement.  smaller  innovative firms cannot afford the patenting and legal costs that the directive would inflict on them   she added. the european parliament has already clashed with the european union on the issue and there have been accusations that the process to decide the issue has been undemocratic. the directive has been subject to several previous delays.
toxic web links help virus spread virus writers have begun using the power of the web to spread their malicious wares.  a windows virus called bofra is turning infected machines into distributors of its malicious code. those clicking on the poisoned links in e-mail messages sent out by infected machines may fall victim to the virus. the trick is being used to prevent the progam being caught by anti-virus software that combs through code contained in e-mail attachments.  the virus that uses this trick is called bofra and the first member of the family of worms appeared on 10 november. they exploit a windows vulnerability that was discovered only a few days earlier.  like many other recent viruses  bofra plunders the address book in microsoft outlook for e-mail addresses and scours other files on an infected machine for fresh target addresses. the virus uses its own mail sending software to despatch e-mail messages to potential victims but  unlike many other recent viruses  does not itself travel via mail. instead the body of the mail messages sent out contain fake weblinks that  when clicked on  connect back to the machine that distributed that e-mail. essentially  bofra turns infected machines into small web servers that happily dole out copies of the virus. the messages try to trick people into clicking on the links by promising pornographic videos and images or by posing as payment confirmation for a paypal transaction.  copies of the messages seen by the bbc news website had bright yellow and green backgrounds. those clicking on the links will inadvertently download the bofra virus which will then start searching for new addresses to send itself to. filtering firm clearswift said this tactic of creating thousands of mini web servers was designed to help the virus spread quickly and avoid attempts to shut it down. in the past other malicious programs have relied on a single web server that downloads viral code to target machines. shutting down this central server usually stops the virus spreading.  clearswift said that fact that no viral code travels in the e-mail messages sent out by machines infected by bofra could hamper effects to limit its spread. finnish anti-virus firm f-secure said that  so far  it had not seen many copies of the bofra virus and its variants in circulation.  tim warner  spokesman for anti-virus firm finjan  said:  you have people getting very creative now to deliver the virus and get it propagating.  mr warner said organisations needed to prepare deep defences to keep out the modern form of malicious mobile code.  most firms have secured their e-mail gateway   said mr warner   but the irony is that most of them let malicious content through the web gateways.  he said behavioural systems that monitor what users do can help to spot when viruses have penetrated organisations and have started hunting for other victims. the bofra family of viruses  which were originally thought to be offshoots of the mydoom bug  can infect machines running windows 2000  95  98  me  nt  xp and server 2003. users running windows xp that have applied the sp2 update are not vulnerable to the loophole that bofra exploits.
apple mac mini gets warm welcome the mac mini has been welcomed by apple fans  industry experts and pc users.  the release of the tiny  low-cost machine is seen as a good move for apple which currently has a small share of the desktop computer market. mac watchers and some analysts say the mac mini will go a long way to help apple appeal to the mass of consumers. they speculate that the mac mini will be bought by ipod owners and those wanting an easy-to-use and administer second home computer.   it s the bravest move they have made yet   said jonny evans  news editor at macworld magazine. mr evans said the combination of low cost  small size and huge numbers of ipod users could make it a big success.  he thought that the machine would appeal to those that like apple technology but who before now have balked at paying high prices for its hardware.  it s deeply affordable   he said.  plus you know that you do not get viruses or all of the associated problems.  already  he said  pc owning friends had declared that they would be buying one. interest in the new products launched at macworld expo was so strong that websites for apple s store and the show struggled to cope with demand. according to response statistics gathered by netcraft many visiting the apple store in the wake of mr jobs  speech suffered lengthy response times. the macworld expo site was completely overwhelmed and went offline.   i think fundamentally it s a good idea because it s cheap even for a pc   said nick ross  deputy labs editor at pc pro. apple s work on making things easy to use would also help the mac mini win fans  he said.  i think people expect it just to work now and really it should   hesaid. the mac mini could find a role in homes that need a second computer that is easy to install and administer  he said.  for browsing the web  e-mail and all kinds of basic duties it s going to be absolutely adequate   said mr ross. ian fogg  broadband and personal technology analyst at jupiter research  agreed that the mac mini could be very popular.  apple has been hoping that sales of the ipod will have a halo effect on the sales of the mac   he said.  before now  he said  apple has been seen as a premium brand. but  he said  the mac mini changed that perception.  it s a particularly good price when you see that it s apple that is doing it   he said. apple expects the mac mini to sell for £339 in the uk and $499 in the us. adding extras such as a larger hard drive  more memory and networking options will increase the basic price. it will go on sale from 22 january.  for consumers interested in style  design and small size - which is what the majority of ipod customers are interested in - it s a natural next step   said mr fogg. apple has traditionally done well in the market that the mac mini is aimed at  said mr fogg  who also expected many pc makers to release copycat devices in reaction.  his only misgivings were over how easy other consumers  other than ipod owners  would find using the machine. he said anyone wanting to use the mac mini with the peripherals from an old computer may find it odd to have something so small and sleek next to a hulking monitor.  they d be much more likely to pair a mac mini with a lcd or flat panel monitor which increases the upgrade cost   he said. those with flat screens and lcd monitors are likely to have bought them recently and not be in the market for a new machine.  there are also questions over whether the mac mini will work with very old peripherals  such as display  keyboard and mouse. the mac mini also fell short of being a media server that can be a video recorder as well as a store for all the digital music  movies and images people accumulate  said mr fogg.  the mac mini is not quite ready for that yet   he said.  it does not have the right connectors that fit a tv screen or enough storage.  said mr fogg:  it s very much a computer.  one dissenting opinion came from brian gammage  vice-president of research at analysts gartner. he said:  i don t think it changes the world.  although the mac mini was very cheap for an apple computer  it was still expensive compared to many pcs. also  he said  it appealed in categories that few consumers care about when buying a home computer.  the pc world is a pile-em-high  sell-em-cheap market   he said   and all of them are pretty interchangeable.   since the days when apple ruled the personal computing world its market share has been on a long  slow decline   he said.  every few years it does something to give its market share a kick then it starts to go back down again   said mr gammage. the release of the mac mini fit perfectly with this trend  he said.
cyber criminals step up the pace so-called phishing attacks that try to trick people into handing over confidential details have boomed in 2004  say security experts.  the number of phishing e-mail messages stopped by security firm messagelabs has risen more than tenfold in less than 12 months. in 2004 it detected more than 18 million phishing e-mail messages. other statistics show that in 2004 73% of all e-mail was spam and one in 16 messages were infected with a virus.  in its end-of-year report  messagelabs said that phishing had become the top security threat and most popular form of attack among cyber criminals. in september 2003  messagelabs caught only 273 phishing e-mails that tried to make people visit fake versions of the websites run by real banks and financial organisations. but by september 2004 it was stopping more than two million phishing related e-mail messages per month. worryingly  said the firm  phishing gangs were using increasingly sophisticated techniques to harvest useful information such as login details or personal data.  older attacks relied on users not spotting the fact that the site they were visiting was fake  but more recent phishing e-mails simply try to steal details as soon as a message is opened. other phishing scams try to recruit innocent people into acting as middlemen for laundering money or goods bought with stolen credit cards.  e-mail security attacks remain unabated in their persistence and ferocity   said mark sunner  chief technology officer at messagelabs.  in just 12 months phishing has firmly established itself as a threat to any organisation or individual conducting business online   he said. mr sunner said messagelabs was starting to see some phishing attacks become very focused on one company or organisation.  already particular businesses are threatened and blackmailed  indicating a shift from the random  scattergun approach  to customised attacks designed to take advantage of the perceived weaknesses of some businesses   he said. although phishing attacks grew substantially throughout 2004  viruses and spam remain popular with cyber-criminals and vandals. one of the biggest outbreaks took place in january when the mydoom virus started circulating. to date the company has caught more than 60 million copies of the virus. also up this year was the amount of spam in circulation. in 2003 only 40% of messages were spam. but by the end of 2004  almost three-quarters of messages were junk.
fast moving phone viruses appear security firms are warning about several mobile phone viruses that can spread much faster than similar bugs.  the new strains of the cabir mobile phone virus use short-range radio technology to leap to any vulnerable phone as soon as it is in range. the cabir virus only affects high-end handsets running the symbian series 60 phone operating system. despite the warnings  there are so far no reports of any phones being infected by the new variants of cabir.  the original cabir worm came to light in mid-june 2004 when it was sent to anti-virus firms as a proof-of-concept program. a mistake in the way the original cabir was written meant that even if it escaped from the laboratory  the bug would only have been able to infect one phone at a time.  however  the new cabir strains have this mistake corrected and will spread via short range bluetooth technology to any vulnerable phone in range. bluetooth has an effective range of a few tens of metres. the risk of being infected by cabir is low because users must give the malicious program permission to download on to their handset and then must manually install it. users can protect themselves by altering a setting on symbian phones that conceals the handset from other bluetooth using devices. finnish security firm f-secure issued a warning about the new strains of cabir but said that the viruses do not do any damage to a phone. all they do is block normal bluetooth activity and drain the phone s battery. anti-virus firm sophos said the source code for cabir had been posted on the net by a brazilian programmer which might lead to even more variants of the program being created. so far seven versions of cabir are know to exist  one of which was inside the malicious skulls program that was found in late november. symbian s series 60 software is licenced by nokia  lg electronics  lenovo  panasonic  samsung  sendo and siemens.
loyalty cards idea for tv addicts viewers could soon be rewarded for watching tv as loyalty cards come to a screen near you.  any household hooked up to sky could soon be using smartcards in conjunction with their set-top boxes. broadcasters such as sky and itv could offer viewers loyalty points in return for watching a particular channel or programme. sky will activate a spare slot on set-top boxes in january  marketing magazine new media age reported.  sky set-top boxes have two slots. one is for the viewer s decryption card  while the other has been dormant until now.  loyalty cards have become a common addition to most wallets  as high street brands rush to keep customers with a series of incentives offered by store cards. now similar schemes look set to enter the highly competitive world of multi-channel tv. viewers who stay loyal to a particular tv channel could be rewarded by free tv content or freebies from retail partners. broadcasters aiming content at children could offer smartcards which gives membership to exclusive content and clubs.  parents could pre-pay for some content  as a kind of tv pocket money card   said nigel whalley  managing director of media consultancy decipher.  viewers could even be rewarded for watching ad breaks  with ideas such as ad bingo being touted by firms keen to make money out of the new market  said mr whalley. credit cards that have been chipped could be used in set-top boxes to pay for movies  gambling and gaming.  the idea of an intelligent card in boxes offers a lot of possibilities. it will be down to the ingenuity of the content players   said mr whalley. for the bbc  revenue-generating activity will be of little interest but the new development may prompt changes to freeview set-top boxes  said mr whalley. currently most freeview boxes do not have a slot which would allow viewers to use a smartcard. some 7.4 million households have sky boxes and sky is hoping to increase this to 10 million by 2010. loyalty cards could play a role in this  particularly in reducing the number of people who cancel their sky subscriptions  said ian fogg  an analyst with jupiter research.
how to smash a home computer an executive who froze his broken hard disk thinking it would be fixed has topped a list of the weirdest computer mishaps.  although computer malfunctions remain the most common cause of file loss  data recovery experts say human behaviour still is to blame in many cases. they say that no matter how effective technology is at rescuing files  users should take more time to back-up and protect important files. the list of the top 10 global data disasters was compiled by recovery company ontrack.  careless - and preventable - mistakes that result in data loss range from reckless file maintenance practices to episodes of pure rage towards a computer. this last category includes the case of a man who became so mad with his malfunctioning laptop that he threw it in the lavatory and flushed a couple of times.  data can disappear as a result of natural disaster  system fault or computer virus  but human error  including  computer rage   seems to be a growing problem   said adrian palmer  managing director of ontrack data recovery.   nevertheless  victims soon calm down when they realise the damage they ve done and come to us with pleas for help to retrieve their valuable information.  a far more common situation is when a computer virus strikes and leads to precious files being corrupted or deleted entirely. mr palmer recalled the case of a couple who had hundreds of pictures of their baby s first three months on their computer  but managed to reformat the hard drive and erase all the precious memories.  data can be recovered from computers  servers and even memory cards used in digital devices in most cases   said mr palmer.  however  individuals and companies can avoid the hassle and stress this can cause by backing up data on a regular basis.
how to make a gigapixel picture the largest digital panoramic photo in the world has been created by researchers in the netherlands.  the finished image is 2.5 billion pixels in size - making it about 500 times the resolution of images produced by good consumer digital cameras. the huge image of delft was created by stitching together 600 single snaps of the dutch city taken at a fixed spot. if printed out in standard 300 dots per inch resolution  the picture would be 2.5m high and 6m long.  the researchers have put the image on a website which lets viewers explore the wealth of detail that it captures. tools on the page let viewers zoom in on the city and its surroundings in great detail. the website is already proving popular and currently has more than 200 000 visitors every day.  the image was created by imaging experts from the dutch research and technology laboratory tno which created the 2.5 gigapixel photo as a summer time challenge.  the goal of the project was to be one of the first groups to make gigapixel images. the first image of such a size was manually constructed by us photographer max lyons in november 2003. that image portrayed bryce canyon national park  in utah  and was made up of 196 separate photographs. the panorama of delft is a little staid in contrast to the dramatic rockscape captured in mr lyons  image.  he did it all by hand  which was an enormous effort  and we got the idea that if you use automatic techniques  it would be feasible to build a larger image   said jurgen den hartog  one of the tno researchers behind the project.  we were not competing with mr lyons  but it started as a lunchtime bet.   the dutch team used already available technologies  although it had to upgrade them to be able to handle the high-resolution image.   we had to rewrite almost all the tools   me den hartog told the bbc news website.  all standard windows viewers available would not be able to load such a large image  so we had to develop one ourselves.  the 600 component pictures were taken on july 2004 by a computer-controlled camera with a 400 mm lens. each image was made to slightly overlap so they could be accurately arranged into a composite. the stitching process was also done automatically using five powerful pcs over three days. following the success of this project  and with promises of help from others  the tno team is considering creating a full 360-degree panoramic view of another dutch city  with even higher resolution.
microsoft makes anti-piracy move microsoft says it is clamping down on people running pirated versions of its windows operating system by restricting their access to security features.  the windows genuine advantage scheme means people will have to prove their software is genuine from mid-2005. it will still allow those with unauthorised copies to get some crucial security fixes via automatic updates  but their options would be  limited . microsoft releases regular security updates to its software to protect pcs. either pcs detect updates automatically or users manually download fixes through microsoft s site. those running pirated windows programs would not have access to other downloads and  add-ons  that the software giant offers.  people who try to manually download security patches will have to let microsoft run an automated checking procedure on their computer or give an identification number.  microsoft s regular patches which it releases for newly-found security flaws are important because they stop worms  viruses and other threats penetrating pcs. some security experts are concerned that restricting access to such patches could mean a rise in such attacks and threats  with more pcs left unprotected. but graham cluley  senior consultant at security firm sophos  told the bbc news website that it was a positive decision.  it sounds like their decision to allow critical security patches to remain available to both legitimate and illegitimate users of windows is good news for everyone who uses the net   he said. windows genuine advantage was first introduced as a pilot scheme in september 2004 for english-language versions of windows.  microsoft s windows operating system is heavily exploited by virus writers because it is so widespread and they are constantly seeking out new security loopholes to take advantage of. the company is trying to tackle security threats whilst cracking down on pirated software at the same time. software piracy has cost the company billions  it says. the company announced earlier in january that it was releasing security tools to clean up pcs harbouring viruses and spyware  which 90% of pcs are infected with. the virus-fighting program  updated monthly  is a precursor to microsoft s dedicated anti-virus software. last year it introduced the windows xp counterfeit project  a uk-based pilot scheme  which ran from november to december. the scheme meant that anyone with pre-installed copies of the operating system in pcs bought before november could replace counterfeit versions of windows xp with legal ones for free. it is also increasing efforts to squash software piracy in china  norway and the czech republic  where pirated software is a huge problem  by offering discounts on legitimate software to users of pirated copies windows.  china in particular is a problem  with piracy estimated at 92%   said mr cluley.
microsoft sets sights on spyware windows users could soon be paying microsoft to keep pcs free of spyware.  following the takeover of anti-spyware firm giant  microsoft said it would soon release a toolkit that strips machines of the irritating programs. although initially free  microsoft has not ruled out charging people who want to keep this toolkit up to date. surveys show that almost every windows pc is infested with spyware programs that do everything from bombard users with adverts to steal login data. microsoft said that a beta version of the toolkit to clean up windows machines should be available within 30 days.  designed for pcs running windows 2000 and xp  the utility will clean out spyware programs  constantly monitor what happens on a pc and will be regularly updated to catch the latest variants. before now many of microsoft s other security boosting programs  such as the firewall in windows xp  have been given away free. but mike nash  vice president in microsoft s security business unit  said it was still working out pricing and licensing issues. charging for future versions has not been discounted  he said.  we ll come up with a plan and roll that out   he said. the plan could turn out to be a lucrative one for microsoft. a recent survey by earthlink and webroot found that 90% of pcs are infested with the surreptitious software and that  on average  each one is harbouring 28 separate spyware programs. currently users wanting protection from spyware have turned to free programs such as spybot and ad-aware. spyware comes in many forms and at its most benign exploits lazy browsing habits to install itself and subject users to unwanted adverts. other forms hijack net browser settings to force people to view pages they would otherwise never visit. at its most malign  spyware watches everything that people do with their pc and steals login information and other personal data. microsoft s announcement about spyware comes after it bought small new york software firm giant company software. terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.
california sets fines for spyware the makers of computer programs that secretly spy on what people do with their home pcs could face hefty fines in california.  from 1 january  a new law is being introduced to protect computer users from software known as spyware. the legislation  which was approved by governor arnold schwarzenegger  is designed to safeguard people from hackers and help protect their personal information. spyware is considered by computer experts to be one of the biggest nuisance and security threats facing pc users in the coming year. the software buries itself in computers and can collect a wide range of information. at its worst  it has the ability to hijack personal data  like passwords  login details and credit card numbers. the programs are so sophisticated they change frequently and become impossible to eradicate.  one form of spyware called adware has the ability to collect information on a computer user s web-surfing. it can result in people being bombarded with pop-up ads that are hard to close. in washington  congress has been debating four anti-spyware bills  but california is a step ahead. the state s consumer protection against spyware act bans the installation of software that takes control of another computer. it also requires companies and websites to disclose whether their systems will install spyware. consumers are able to seek up to $1 000 in damages if they think they have fallen victim to the intrusive software. the new law marks a continuing trend in california towards tougher privacy rights. a recent survey by earthlink and webroot found that 90% of pcs are infested with the surreptitious software and that  on average  each one is harbouring 28 separate spyware programs. currently users wanting protection from spyware have turned to free programs such as spybot and ad-aware.
broadband in the uk growing fast high-speed net connections in the uk are proving more popular than ever.  bt reports that more people signed up for broadband in the last three months than in any other quarter. the 600 000 connections take the total number of people in the uk signing up for broadband from bt to almost 3.3 million. nationally more than 5 million browse the net via broadband. britain now has among the highest number of broadband connections throughout the whole of europe.  according to figures gathered by industry watchdog  ofcom  the growth means that the uk has now surpassed germany in terms of broadband users per 100 people. the uk total of 5.3 million translates into 7.5 connections per 100 people  compared to 6.7 in germany and 15.8 in the netherlands. the numbers of people signing up to broadband include those that get their service direct from bt or via the many companies that re-sell bt lines under their own name. part of the surge in people signing up was due to bt stretching the reach of adsl - the uk s most widely used way of getting broadband - beyond 6km.  asymmetric digital subscriber line technology lets ordinary copper phone lines support high data speeds. the standard speed is 512kbps  though faster connections are available.  this breakthrough led to a dramatic increase in orders as we were suddenly able to satisfy the pent-up demand that existed in many areas   said paul reynolds  chief executive of bt wholesale which provides phone lines that other firms re-sell. bt retail  which sells net services under its own name  also had a good quarter and provided about 30% of the new broadband customers. this was a slight increase on the previous three months. despite the good news about growth in broadband  figures from telecommunications regulator ofcom show that bt faces increasing competition  and dwindling influence  in other sectors. local loop unbundling  (llu)  in which bt rivals install their hardware in exchanges and take over the line to a customer s home or office  is growing steadily. cable & wireless and ntl have announced that they are investing millions to start offering llu services. by the end of september more than 4.2 million phone lines were using so-called carrier pre-section (cps) services  such as talktalk and one.tel  which route phone calls across non-bt networks from a local exchange. there are now more than 300 different firms offering cps services and the percentage of people using bt lines for voice calls has shrunk to 55.4%.
t-mobile bets on  pocket office  t-mobile has launched its latest  pocket office  third-generation (3g) device which also has built-in wi-fi - high-speed wireless net access.  unlike other devices where the user has to check which high-speed network is available to transfer data  the device selects the fastest one itself. the mda iv  released in the summer  is an upgrade to the company s existing smartphone  the 2.5g/wi-fi mda iii. it reflects the push by mobile firms for devices that are like mini laptops. the device has a display that can be swivelled and angled so it can be used like a small computer  or as a conventional clamshell phone. the microsoft mobile phone  with two cameras and a qwerty keyboard  reflects the design of similar all-in-one models released this year  such as motorola s mpx.  one in five european workers are already mobile - meaning they spend significant time travelling and out of the office   rene obermann  t-mobile s chief executive  told a press conference at the 3gsm trade show in cannes. he added:  what they need is their office when they are out of the office.  t-mobile said it was seeing increasing take up for what it calls  office in a pocket  devices  with 100 000 mdas sold in europe already.  in response to demand  t-mobile also said it would be adding the latest phone-shaped blackberry to its mobile range. reflecting the growing need to be connected outside the office  it announced it would introduce a flat-fee £20 ($38) a month wi-fi tariff for people in the uk using its wi-fi hotspots. it said it would nearly double the number of its hotspots - places where wi-fi access is available - globally from 12 300 to 20 000.  it also announced it was installing high-speed wi-fi on certain train services  such as the uk s london to brighton service  to provide commuters a fast net connection too. the service  which has been developed with southern trains  nomad digital (who provide the technology)  begins with a free trial on 16 trains on the route from early march to the end of april. a full service is set to follow in the summer. wi-fi access points will be connected to a wimax wireless network - faster than wi-fi - running alongside the train tracks. brian mcbride  managing director of t-mobile in the uk  said:  we see a growing trend for business users needing to access e-mail securely on the move.   we are able to offer this by maintaining a constant data session for the entire journey.  he said this was something other similar in-train wi-fi services  such as that offered on gner trains  did not offer yet. mr obermann added that the mobile industry in general was still growing  with many more opportunities for more services which would bear fruit for mobile companies in future. thousands of mobile industry experts are gathered in cannes  france  for the 3gsm which runs from 14 to 17 february.
nintendo adds media playing to ds nintendo is releasing an adapter for its ds handheld console so it can play music and video.  the add-on for the ds means people can download tv programmes  film clips or mp3 files to the adaptor and then play them back while on the move. the release of the media add-on is an attempt by the japanese games giant to protect its dominance of the handheld gaming market. nintendo said the media adapter will be available from february in japan.  the nintendo ds is the successor to the hugely successful gameboy handheld game console and went on sale in japan on 2 december. the ds has two screens  one of which is touch sensitive  and also has on-board a short-range wireless link that lets people play against each other.  the launch of the media adapter  and the attempt to broaden the appeal of the device  is widely seen as a response to the unveiling of the sony psp which was built as a multi-purpose media player and game gadget from the start. sony is thought to be preparing pre-packaged movies and music for the psp. the add-on will also work with the gameboy advance sp. nintendo dominates the handheld gaming console world thanks to successive versions of the gameboy. more than 28 million gameboy advance handhelds have been sold around the world. the dual-screen ds is also thought to be selling well with more than 2.5 million expected to be sold by the end of 2004. nintendo said it had no plans to sell the media adapter outside japan. when it goes on sale the adapter is expected to cost about 5000 yen (£25)  roughly the difference in price between the ds and the higher-priced sony psp.
home phones face unclear future the fixed line phone in your home could soon be an endangered species.  research by handset maker nokia shows that more and more people are using their mobile phone for every call they make or take. according to the study  more than 45 million people in the uk  germany  us and south korea now only use a mobile. it showed that people keep their fixed line phone because call charges are lower  but most of those questioned said the future was definitely mobile.  the nokia-sponsored research showed that mobiles and fixed phones were used for different purposes. home phones were used for longer calls but conversations on mobiles tended to be shorter  between mobiles and to friends. in the uk 69% of those questioned said they turned to their fixed phone because it was still cheaper to use than a mobile. however  when pressed few could say with accuracy how tariffs on fixed and mobile phones compared. in the us and germany many of those interviewed said they used the fixed phone because it was more reliable than a mobile handset and let them get access to the net at relatively high speeds. in all the countries where interviews were carried out  older people were more likely to use a fixed line phone more than a mobile. women aged 50 or above almost never use a mobile phone  the research found.  the move to mobile was most pronounced in south korea where 65% of those questioned said they already make most of their calls from a mobile. 18% said they would not get a landline if they moved house.  many of those questioned said they had an emotional connection to their fixed phone that drew on its position in the home and the  cosiness  of making a call there. nokia said these findings had implications for mobile operators who must work hard to ensure that mobiles are seen as cheap  reliable and providing good call quality. the survey also showed that it is not just voice calls that are going wireless. some of those questioned said they were looking to use a mobile or wireless service to get net access within the next couple of years. polling firm mori interviewed more than 6 000 people in the uk  us  germany and south korea for the survey.
online games play with politics after bubbling under for some time  online games broke through onto the political arena in 2004.  the us presidential election provided a showcase for many  aimed at talking directly to a generation that has grown up with joysticks and gamepads. experts say this reflects how video games are becoming a mainstream part of culture and society. the first official political campaign game was technically launched during the last week of 2003: the iowa game  commissioned by the democrat hopeful howard dean. more than 20 followed suit  including frontrunner  elections  president forever and the political machine  which allowed players to run an entire presidential campaign  including having to cope with the media. others helped raise the stakes during the bush/kerry contest by highlighting a candidate s virtues or his vices.  the phenomenon has astonished the forefathers of political games  a handful of multi-discipline games enthusiasts keen to push frontiers.   when i started researching political games at the university  about five years ago  i thought it was going to be something that would take decades to happen   said gonzalo frasca  computer games specialist at the information technology university of copenhagen.  i must admit that i was the first person to be surprised at seeing how fast they have evolved   added the uruguayan-born researcher  who has so far created games for two political campaigns. many artists and designers are experimenting with this form of gaming with an agenda in projects such as newsgaming.com. the aim is to comment on international news events via games.  the ability of games to simulate reality makes them a powerful modelling tool to interact with actual situations in an original way.   video games generate strong reactions mainly because they are new  but also because our culture needs to learn how to deal with simulation   mr frasca told the bbc news website. this was the case with the one he created for a political party in uruguay  cambiemos  an online puzzle game that offered a view on how the country s problems could be solved by working together.  it s up to us to explore what we can learn from ourselves through play and video games.  ultimately  dr frasca sees games as a small laboratory where we can play with our hopes  fears and beliefs.  children learn a lot about the world through play. there is no reason why we adults should stop doing it as we grow up.   but experts estimate it will still take at least about a decade until this new breed of video gaming communication become a common tool for political campaigns.  this is hardly surprising  compared to other forms of mass media like the worldwide web. only a few years ago  most politicians did not have a webpage  while now it is almost a must-have. dr frasca said:  political campaigns will continue to experiment with video games. they represent a new tool of communication that can reach a younger audience in a language that can clearly speak to them.   it will not replace other forms of political propaganda  but it will integrate itself on to the media ecology of political campaigns.
peer-to-peer nets  here to stay  peer-to-peer (p2p) networks are here to stay  and are on the verge of being exploited by commercial media firms  says a panel of industry experts.  once several high-profile legal cases against file-sharers are resolved this year  firms will be very keen to try and make money from p2p technology. the expert panel probed the future of p2p at the consumer electronics show in las vegas earlier in january. the first convictions for p2p piracy were handed out in the us in january. william trowbridge and michael chicoine pleaded guilty to charges that they infringed copyright by illegally sharing music  movies and software. since the first successful file-sharing network napster was forced to close down  the entertainment industry has been nervous and critical of p2p technology  blaming it for falling sales and piracy. but that is going to change very soon  according to the panel.  the music and film industries have started some big legal cases against owners of legitimate p2p networks - which are not illegal in themselves - and of individuals accused of distributing pirated content over networks. but they have slowly realised that p2p is a good way to distribute content  said travis kalanick  founder and chairman of p2p network red swoosh  and soon they are all going to want a slice of it. they are just waiting to come up with  business models  that work for them  which includes digital rights management and copy-protection standards.  but  until the legal actions are resolved  experimentation with p2p cannot not happen  said michael weiss  president of streamcast networks. remembering the furore around vcrs when they first came out  mr weiss said:  old media always tries to stop new media.  when they can t stop it  they try to control it. then they figure out how to make money and they always make a lot of money.  once the courts decided that the vcr in itself was not an illegal technology  the film studios turned it into an extremely lucrative business. in august 2004  the san francisco-based us court of appeals ruled in favour of grokster and streamcast  two file-sharing networks. the court said they were essentially in the same position that sony was in the 1980s vcr battle  and said that the networks themselves could not be deemed as illegal.  p2p networks usually do not rely on dedicated servers for the transfer of files. instead it uses direct connections between computers - or clients. there are now many different types of p2p systems than work in different ways. p2p nets can be used to share any kind of file  like photos  free software  licensed music and any other digital content. the bbc has already decided to embrace the technology. it aims to offer most of its own programmes for download this year and it will use p2p technology to distribute them. the files would be locked seven days after a programme aired making rights management easier to control. but the technology is still demonised and misunderstood by many. the global entertainment industry says more than 2.6 billion copyrighted music files are downloaded every month  and about half a million films are downloaded a day. legal music download services  like apple itunes  napster  have rushed into the music marketplace to try and lure file-sharers away from free content. sales of legally-downloaded songs grew tenfold in 2004  with 200 million tracks bought online in the us and europe in 12 months  the ifpi reported this week. but such download services are very different from p2p networks  not least because of the financial aspect.  there are several money-spinning models that could turn p2p into a golden egg for commercial entertainment companies. paid-for-pass-along  in which firms receive money each time a file is shared  along with various drm solutions and advertiser-based options are all being considered.  we see there are going to be different models for commoditising p2p   said marc morgenstern  vice president of anti-piracy firm overpeer.   consumers are hungry for it and we will discover new models together   agreed mr morgenstern. but many net users will continue to ignore the entertainment industry s potential controlling grip on content and p2p technology by continuing to use it for their own creations. unsigned bands  for example  use p2p networks to distribute their music effectively  which also draws the attention of record companies looking for new artists to sign.  increasingly  what you are seeing on p2p is consumer-created content   said derek broes  from microsoft.  they will probably play an increasing role in helping p2p spread   he said. looking into p2p s future  file sharing is just the beginning for p2p networks  as far as mr broes is concerned.  once some of these issues are resolved  you are going to see aggressive movement to protect content  but also in ways that are unimaginable now   he said.  file-sharing is the tip of the iceberg.
portable playstation ready to go sony s playstation portable (psp) will go on sale in japan on 12 december.  the long-awaited handheld game playing gadget will cost about 19 800 yen (145 euros) when it hits the shelves. at launch 21 games will be available for the psp  including need for speed  ridge racer  metal gear acid and vampire chronicle. sony has not yet announced when the psp will be available in europe and the us  but analysts expect it to debut in those territories in early 2005.  fifa 2005 is back at the top of the uk games charts  a week after losing it to rival pro evolution soccer 4. konami s pro evo dropped only one place to two  while the only new entry in the top 10 was another football title  lma manager 2005  in at number seven. tony hawk s underground 2 held its own at three  while star wars battlefront inched up to four places to four. there was good news for disney  with the spin-off from the shark s tale film moving up the charts into number eight.  fans of the gran turismo series in europe are going to have to wait until next year for the latest version. sony has said that the pal version of gt4 will not be ready for christmas.  the product is localised into 13 different languages across the pal territories  therefore the process takes considerably longer than it does in japan   it said. gran turismo 4 for the playstation 2 is still expected to be released in japan and the usa this year.  halo 2 has broken video game records  with pre-orders of more than 1.5 million in the us alone. some 6 500 us stores plan to open just after midnight on tuesday 9 november for the game s release.  halo 2 is projected to bring in more revenue than any day one box office blockbuster movie in the united states   said xbox s peter moore.  we ve even heard rumours of fan anticipation of the  halo 2 flu  on 9 november.
intel unveils laser breakthrough intel has unveiled research that could mean data is soon being moved around chips at the speed of light.  scientists at intel have overcome a fundamental problem that before now has prevented silicon being used to generate and amplify laser light. the breakthrough should make it easier to interconnect data networks with the chips that process the information. the intel researchers said products exploiting the breakthrough should appear by the end of the decade.   we ve overcome a fundamental limit   said dr mario paniccia  director of intel s photonics technology lab. writing in the journal nature  dr paniccia - and colleagues haisheng rong  richard jones  ansheng liu  oded cohen  dani hak and alexander fang - show how they have made a continuous laser from the same material used to make computer processors. currently  says dr paniccia  telecommunications equipment that amplifies the laser light that travels down fibre optic cables is very expensive because of the exotic materials  such as gallium arsenide  used to make it.  telecommunications firms and chip makers would prefer to use silicon for these light-moving elements because it is cheap and many of the problems of using it in high-volume manufacturing have been solved.  we re trying to take our silicon competency in manufacturing and apply it to new areas   said dr paniccia. while work has been done to make some of the components that can move light around  before now silicon has not successfully been used to generate or amplify the laser light pulses used to send data over long distances. this is despite the fact that silicon is a much better amplifier of light pulses than the form of the material used in fibre optic cables. this improved amplification is due to the crystalline structure of the silicon used to make computer chips. dr paniccia said that the structure of silicon meant that when laser light passed through it  some colliding photons rip electrons off the atoms within the material.  it creates a cloud of electrons sitting in the silicon and that absorbs all the light   he said. but the intel researchers have found a way to suck away these errant electrons and turn silicon into a material that can both generate and amplify laser light. even better  the laser light produced in this way can  with the help of easy-to-make filters  be tuned across a very wide range of frequencies. semi-conductor lasers made before now have only produced light in a narrow frequency ranges. the result could be the close integration of the fibre optic cables that carry data as light with the computer chips that process it. dr paniccia said the work was the one of several steps needed if silicon was to be used to make components that could carry and process light in the form of data pulses.  it s a technical validation that it can work   he said.
security warning over  fbi virus  the us federal bureau of investigation is warning that a computer virus is being spread via e-mails that purport to be from the fbi.  the e-mails show that they have come from an fbi.gov address and tell recipients that they have accessed illegal websites. the messages warn that their internet use has been monitored by the fbi s internet fraud complaint center. an attachment in the e-mail contains the virus  the fbi said. the message asks recipients to click on the attachment and answer some questions about their internet use. but rather than being a questionnaire  the attachment contains a virus that infects the recipient s computer  according to the agency. it is not clear what the virus does once it has infected a computer. users are warned never to open attachment from unsolicited e-mails or from people they do not know.   recipients of this or similar solicitations should know that the fbi does not engage in the practice of sending unsolicited e-mails to the public in this manner   the fbi said in a statement. the bureau is investigating the phoney e-mails. the agency earlier this month shut down fbi.gov accounts  used to communicate with the public  because of a security breach. a spokeswoman said the two incidents appear to be unrelated.
putting a face to  big brother  literally putting a face on technology could be one of the keys to improving our interaction with hi-tech gadgets.  imagine a surveillance system that also presents a virtual embodiment of a person on a screen who can react to your behaviour  and perhaps even alert you to new e-mails. basic versions of these so-called avatars already exist. together with speech and voice recognition systems  they could replace the keyboard and mouse in the near future. some of these ideas have been showcased at the london s science museum  as part of its future face exhibition.  one such avatar is jeremiah. it is a virtual man  which you can download for free and install in your computer.  his creator  richard bowden  lecturer at the centre for vision  speech and signal processing at the university of surrey  refers to jeremiah as  him   rather than it.  jeremiah is a virtual face that attempts to emulate humans in the way it responds to activity. he is very childlike  he likes visual stimulus   he told the bbc news website.  when he sees children running and laughing and waving at him  he smiles at them. if you ignore him  he gets angry. if you leave  he gets sad. and you can also even surprise him.  jeremiah is not actually intelligent. it works on vision  reacting in a preset way to the information provided by a surveillance tracker system. it is not able to talk or to hear you  at least not yet. the surrey team is already working on jeremiah s next version  that will replace the human face with an underwater and more interactive creature: finn the fish.  i am interested in the interaction  providing the ability of a system to watch what s going on and make decisions based on that   explained dr bowden.  the research comes at a time when people are having to cope with an increasing number of hi-tech gadgets.  experts say a much more natural way to interact with these devices  such as a virtual human  could make it much easier to make the most of all those new gizmos.  if you get up at three o clock in the morning  and you go downstairs  there are probably two things you are going to do: either going to the bathroom  or maybe you are going to make a cup of tea   said dr bowden.  now if the system can watch your behaviour over time  it can learn this  so it would predict what you are going to do  turn on the lights for you  or  before you even get to the kettle  it could have switched it on.  you might even be able to tell your home surveillance system that you will be going away on holiday  and ask if it could make sure that the house is secure once you have left. this might sound like a scary vision of an orwellian future. but it might all depend on the face that is watching you.  when we put the surveillance cameras in our centre  a lot of people were very unhappy about the fact that there was a system watching them   said dr bowden.  but when jeremiah s camera went in  nobody minded  because although it s still watching them  they could see what it was watching.
gadget show heralds mp3 season partners of those who love their hi-tech gear may want to get their presents in early as experts predict a gadget shortage this christmas.  with apple s ipod topping wish lists again  there may not be enough ipod minis to go round  predicts oliver irish  editor of gadget magazine stuff.  the ipod mini is likely to be this year s tracey island   said mr irish. stuff has compiled a list of the top 10 gadgets for 2004 and the ipod is at number one.  for anyone bewildered by the choice of gadgets on the market  stuff and what hi-fi  are hosting a best-of gadget show in london this weekend. star of the show will be sony s qrio robot  an all-singing  all-dancing  football-playing man-machine who can even hold intelligent conversations.  but he is not for sale and sony has no commercial plans for the robot.  he will greet visitors and is flying in from japan. he probably has his own airplane seat  that is how highly sony prize him   said mr irish. also on display will be a virtual keyboard which projects itself onto any flat surface. the event will play host to a large collection of digital music players  from companies such as creative  sony and philips as well as the ubiquitously fashionable ipod from apple. suggestions that it could be a gaming or wireless christmas are unlikely to come true as mp3 players remain the most popular stocking filler  said mr irish.  demand is huge and apple has promised that it can supply enough but people might struggle to get their hands on ipod minis   said mr irish.  for those who like their gadgets to be multi-talented  the gizmondo  a powerful gaming console with gps and gprs  that also doubles up as an mp3 player  movie player and camera  could be a must-have.  what is impressive is how much it can do and how well it can do them   said mr irish. this christmas  gadgets will not be an all-male preserve.  women will be getting gadgets from husbands and boyfriends as well as buying them for themselves   said mr irish.  gadgets nowadays are lifestyle products rather than just for geeks.
commodore finds new lease of life the once-famous commodore computer brand could be resurrected after being bought by a us-based digital music distributor.  new owner yeahronimo media ventures has not ruled out the possibility of a new breed of commodore computers. it also plans to develop a  worldwide entertainment concept  with the brand  although details are not yet known. the groundbreaking commodore 64 computer elicits fond memories for those who owned one back in the 1980s.  in the chronology of home computing  commodore was one of the pioneers.  the commodore 64  launched in 1982  was one of the first affordable home pcs. it was followed a few years later by the amiga. the commodore 64 sold more than any other single computer system  even to this day. the brand languished somewhat in the 1990s. commodore international filed for bankruptcy in 1994 and was sold to dutch firm tulip computers. in the late 1980s the firm was a great rival to atari  which produced its own range of home computers and is now a brand of video games  formerly known as infogrames.  tulip computers sold several products under the commodore name  including portable usb storage devices and digital music players. it had planned to relaunch the brand  following an upsurge of nostalgia for 1980s-era games. commodore 64 enthusiasts have written emulators for windows pc  apple mac and even pdas so that the original commodore games can be still run. the sale of commodore is expected to be complete in three weeks in a deal worth over £17m.
virus poses as christmas e-mail security firms are warning about a windows virus disguising itself as an electronic christmas card.  the zafi.d virus translates the christmas greeting on its subject line into the language of the person receiving infected e-mail. anti-virus firms speculate that this multilingual ability is helping the malicious program spread widely online. anti-virus firm sophos said that 10% of the e-mail currently on the net was infected with the zafi virus.  like many other windows viruses  zafi-d plunders microsoft outlook for e-mail addresses and then uses mail-sending software to despatch itself across the web to new victims. to be infected users must open up the attachment travelling with the message which bears the code for the malicious bug. the attachment on the e-mail poses as an electronic christmas card but anyone opening it will simply get a crude image of two smiley faces.  the virus  subject line says  merry christmas  and translates this into one of 15 languages depending of the final suffix of the e-mail address the infected message has been sent to. the message in the body of the e-mail reads:  happy holidays  and this too is translated. on infected machines the virus tries to disable anti-virus and firewall software and opens up a backdoor on the pc to hand over control to the writer of the virus. the virus is thought to have spread most widely in south america  italy  spain  bulgaria and hungary. the original zafi virus appeared in april this year.  we have seen these hoaxes for several christmases already  and personally i prefer traditional pen and paper cards  and we recommend this to all our clients too   said mikko hypponen  who heads f-secure s anti-virus team.
uk pioneers digital film network the world s first digital cinema network will be established in the uk over the next 18 months.  the uk film council has awarded a contract worth £11.5m to arts alliance digital cinema (aadc)  who will set up the network of up to 250 screens. aadc will oversee the selection of cinemas across the uk which will use the digital equipment. high definition projectors and computer servers will be installed to show mainly british and specialist films. most cinemas currently have mechanical projectors but the new network will see up to 250 screens in up to 150 cinemas fitted with digital projectors capable of displaying high definition images. the new network will double the world s total of digital screens. cinemas will be given the film on a portable hard drive and they will then copy the content to a computer server.  each film is about 100 gigabytes and has been compressed from an original one terabyte-size file. fiona deans  associate director of aadc  said the compression was visually lossless so no picture degradation will occur.  the film will all be encrypted to prevent piracy and each cinema will have an individual key which will unlock the movie.  people will see the picture quality is a bit clearer with no scratches.  the picture will look exactly the same as when the print was first made - there is no degradation in quality over time.   the key benefit of the digital network will be an increase in the distribution and screening of british films  documentaries and foreign language films.   access to specialised film is currently restricted across the uk   said pete buckingham  head of distribution and exhibition at the uk film council.  although a genuine variety of films is available in central london and a few other metropolitan areas  the choice for many outside these areas remains limited  and the digital screen network will improve access for audiences across the uk   digital prints costs less than a traditional 35mm print - giving distributors more flexibility in how they screen films  said ms deans.  it can cost up to £1 500 to make a copy of a print for specialist films.  in the digital world you can make prints for considerably less than that.  distributors can then send out prints to more cinemas and prints can stay in cinemas for much longer.  the uk digital network will be the first to employ 2k projectors - which are capable of showing films at resolutions of 2048 * 1080 pixels. a separate competitive process to determine which cinemas will receive the digital screening technology will conclude in may. the sheer cost of traditional prints means that some cinemas need to show them twice a day in order to recoup costs.  some films need word of mouth and time to build momentum - they don t need to be shown twice a day   explained ms deans.  a cinema will often book a 35mm print in for two weeks - even if the film is a roaring success they cannot hold on to the print because it will have to go to another cinema.  with digital prints  every cinema will have its own copy.
mobile multimedia slow to catch on there is no doubt that mobile phones sporting cameras and colour screens are hugely popular. consumers swapping old phones for slinkier  dinkier versions are thought to be responsible for a 26% increase in the number of phones sold during the third quarter of 2004  according to analysts gartner more than 167 million handsets were sold between july and september 2004  a period that  according to gartner analyst carolina milanesi is  seldom strong . but although consumers have mobiles that can take and send snaps  sounds and video clips few  so far  are taking the chance to do so.  in fact  the numbers of people not taking and sending pictures  audio and video is growing. figures gathered by continental research shows that 36% of british camera phone users have never sent a multimedia message (mms)  up from 7% in 2003. this is despite the fact that  during the same period  the numbers of camera phones in the uk more than doubled to 7.5 million. getting mobile phone users to send multimedia messages is really important for operators keen to squeeze more cash out of their customers and offset the cost of subsidising the handsets people are buying. the problem they face  said shailendra jain  head of mms firm adamind  is educating people in how to send the multimedia messages using their funky handsets.   also   he said   they have to simplify the interface so its not rocket science in terms of someone understanding it.  research bears out the suspicion that people are not sending multimedia messages because they do not know how to. according to continental research  29% of the people it questioned said they were technophobes that tended to shy away from innovation. only 11% regarded themselves as technically savvy enough to send a picture or video message. the fact that multimedia services are not interoperable across networks and phones only adds to people s reluctance to start sending them  said mr jain.  they ask themselves:  if i m streaming video from one handset to another will it work    he said.  there s a lot of user apprehension about that.   there are other deeper technical reasons why multimedia messages are not being pushed as strongly as they might. andrew bud  executive chairman of messaging firm mblox  said mobile phone operators cap the number of messages that can be circulating at any one time for fear of overwhelming the system.  the rate we can send mms into the mobile network is fairly constant   he said. the reason for this is that there are finite capacities for data traffic on the second generation networks that currently have the most users.  no-one wants to take the risk of swamping these relatively narrow channels so the number of mms messages is capped  said mr bud. this has led to operators finding other technologies  particularly one known as wap-push  to get multimedia to their customers. but when networks do find a good way to get multimedia to their customers  the results can be dramatic. israeli technology firm celltick has found a way to broadcast data across phone networks in a way that does not overwhelm existing bandwidth. one of the first firms to use the celltick service is hutch india  the largest mobile firm in the country. the broadcast system gets multimedia to customers via a rolling menu far faster than would be possible with other systems. while not multimedia messaging  such a system gets people used to seeing their phones as a device that can handle all different types of content. as a result 40% of the subscribers to the hutch alive  which uses celltick s broadcast technology  regularly click for more pictures  sounds and images from the operator.  operators really need to start utilising this tool to reach their customers   said yaron toren  spokesman for celltick. until then  multimedia will be a message that is not getting through.
have hackers recruited your pc  more than one million computers on the net have been hijacked to attack websites and pump out spam and viruses.  the huge number was revealed by security researchers who have spent months tracking more than 100 networks of remotely-controlled machines. the largest network of so-called zombie networks spied on by the team was made up of 50 000 hijacked home computers. data was gathered using machines that looked innocent but which logged everything hackers did to them.  the detailed look at zombie or  bot nets of hijacked computers was done by the honeynet project - a group of security researchers that gather information using networks of computers that act as  honey pots  to attract hackers and gather information about how they work. while  bot nets have been known about for some time  estimates of how widespread they are from security firms have varied widely.  to gather its information the german arm of the honeynet project created software tools to log what happened to the machines they put on the web. getting the machines hijacked was worryingly easy. the longest time a honeynet machine survived without being found by an automatic attack tool was only a few minutes. the shortest compromise time was only a few seconds. the research found that  once compromised machines tend to report in to chat channels on irc servers and wait instructions from the malicious hacker behind the tools used to recruit the machine. many well-known vulnerabilities in the windows operating system were exploited by  bot net controllers to find and take over target machines. especially coveted were home pcs sitting on broadband connections that are never turned off.  the months of surveillance revealed that the different  bot nets - which involve a few hundred to tens of thousands of machines - are used for a variety of purposes. many are used as relays for spam  to route unwanted adverts to pc users or as launch platforms for viruses. but the research team found that many are put to very different uses. during the monitoring period  the team saw  bot nets used to launch 226 distributed denial-of-service attacks on 99 separate targets. these attacks bombard websites with data in an attempt to overwhelm the target. using a  bot net of machines spread around different networks and nations makes such attacks hard to defend against. one ddos attack was used by one firm to knock its competitors offline. other  bot nets were used to abuse the google adsense program that rewards websites for displaying adverts from the search engine. some networks were used to abuse or manipulate online polls and games. criminals also seem to be starting to use  bot nets for mass identity theft  to host websites that look like those of banks so confidential information can be gathered and to peep into online traffic to steal sensitive data.  leveraging the power of several thousand bots  it is viable to take down almost any website or network instantly   said the researchers.  even in unskilled hands  it should be obvious that  bot nets are a loaded and powerful weapon.
apple sues  tiger  file sharers apple has taken more legal action to stop online leaks of its new products.  the computer giant has sued three men for releasing preview versions of its latest mac osx software onto file-sharing sites prior to its release. it said two versions of the operating system  codenamed tiger  were put onto the net in october and december. it is the second time in two weeks apple has taken legal action to protect its future products. tiger is due to be shipped in early 2005. last week  it filed a lawsuit against  unnamed individuals  who leaked details about new products onto the web.  the latest action was against members of the apple developer connection  a group of programmers which gets to see test versions of upcoming software so they can develop or change their own programs to work with them.  members of apple developer connection receive advance copies of apple software under strict confidentiality agreements  which we take very seriously to protect our intellectual property   apple said in a statement.  it added that its future financial results were very much dependent on developing and improving its operating systems and other software. it is thought the men used sites which employ bittorrent technology. with bittorrent technology  sites do not host actual files being shared  instead they host a link that points people to others that have the particular file. last week  the motion picture association of america launched a legal campaign targeting websites that operate using the bittorrent system in an effort to clamp down on movie piracy. apple is no stranger to taking legal action against those who leak product information. in december 2002  it sued a former contractor who allegedly put drawings  images and engineering details of its powermac g4 computer online. the latest action was filed on monday in the us district court in california. it comes just weeks before the macworld conference in san francisco  used to showcase new products.
games maker fights for survival one of britain s largest independent game makers  argonaut games  has been put up for sale.  the london-based company behind the harry potter games has sacked about 100 employees due to a severe cash crisis. the administrators told bbc news online that selling argonaut was the only way to save it as it had run out of cash. argonaut warned that it was low on cash 10 days ago when its shares were suspended from trading on the london stock exchange.  argonaut has been making games for some 18 years and is one the largest independent games developers in the uk.  along with its headquarters in north london  it operates studios in cambridge and sheffield. argonaut was behind the harry potter games which provided a healthy flow of cash into the company. but  like all software developers  argonaut needed a constant flow of deals with publishers. signs that it was in trouble emerged in august  when it warned it was heading for losses of £6m in the financial year due to delays in signing new contracts for games. those new deals were further delayed  leading argonaut to warn in mid-october that it was running out of cash and suspend trading of its shares on the london stock exchange. as part of cost-cutting measures  some 100 employees were fired.  when the news about the £6m loss came out  we knew there were going to be redundancies   said jason parkinson  one of the game developers sacked by argonaut.  a lot of people suspected that argonaut had been in trouble for some time   he told bbc news online. mr parkinson said staff were told the job losses were necessary to save argonaut from going under. at the start of the year  the company employed 268 people. after the latest round of cuts there are 80 staff at argonaut headquarters in edgware in north london  with 17 at its morpheme offices in kentish town  london  and 22 at the just add monsters base in cambridge.  argonaut called in administrators david rubin & partners on friday to find a way to rescue the company from collapse. it spent the weekend going over the company s finances and concluded that the only way to save the business was to put it up for sale. the administrator told bbc news online that the costs of restructuing would be too high  partly because of the overheads from the company s four premises across the uk. it said it was hopeful that it could save some 110 jobs by selling the business  saying it had had expressions of interest from several quarters and were looking for a quick sale. the administrator said it would ensure that staff made redundant would receive any wages  redundancy or holiday pay due to them  hopefully by christmas.
hi-tech posters guide commuters interactive posters are helping londoners get around the city during the festive season.  when interrogated with a mobile phone  the posters pass on a number that people can call to get information about the safest route home. sited at busy underground stations  the posters are fitted with an infra-red port that can beam information directly to a handset. the posters are part of transport for london s safe travel at night campaign.  the campaign is intended to help londoners  especially women  avoid trouble on the way home. in particular it aims to cut the number of sexual assaults by drivers of unlicensed minicabs. nigel marson  head of group marketing at transport for london (tfl)  said the posters were useful because they work outside the mobile phone networks.  they can work in previously inaccessible areas such as underground stations which is obviously a huge advantage in a campaign of this sort   he said.  the posters will automatically beam information to any phone equipped with an ir port that is held close to the glowing red icon on the poster.  we started with infra-red because there are a huge number ir phones out there   said rachel harker  spokeswoman for hypertag which makes the technology fitted to the posters.  it s a well established technology.  hypertag is also now making a poster that uses short-range bluetooth radio technology to swap data. although the hypertags in the posters only pass on a phone number  ms harker said they can pass on almost any form of data including images  ring tones and video clips. she said that there are no figures for how many people are using the posters but a previous campaign run for a cosmetics firm racked up 12 500 interactions.  before we ran a campaign there was a big question mark of:  if we build it will they come    she said.  now we know that  yes  they will.  the tfl campaign using the posters will run until boxing day.
eu software patent law faces axe the european parliament has thrown out a bill that would have allowed software to be patented.  politicians unanimously rejected the bill and now it must go through another round of consultation if it is to have a chance of becoming law. during consultation the software patents bill could be substantially re-drafted or even scrapped. the bill was backed by some hi-tech firms  saying they needed protections it offered to make research worthwhile.  hugo lueders  european director for public policy at comptia  an umbrella organization for technology companies  said only when intellectual property was adequately protected would european inventors prosper. he said the benefits of the bill had been obscured by special interest groups which muddied debate over the rights and wrongs of software patents. other proponents of the bill said it was a good compromise that avoided the excesses of the american system which allows the patenting of business practices as well as software. but opponents of the bill said that it could stifle innovation  be abused by firms keen to protect existing monopolies and could hamper the growth of the open source movement. the proposed law had a troubled passage through the european parliament. its progress was delayed twice when polish meps rejected plans to adopt it. also earlier this month the influential european legal affairs committee (juri) said the law should be re-drafted after it failed to win the support of meps. to become law both the european parliament and a qualified majority of eu states have to approve of the draft wording of the bill. the latest rejection means that now the bill on computer inventions must go back to the eu for re-consideration.
blog reading explodes in america americans are becoming avid blog readers  with 32 million getting hooked in 2004  according to new research.  the survey  conducted by the pew internet and american life project  showed that blog readership has shot up by 58% in the last year. some of this growth is attributable to political blogs written and read during the us presidential campaign. despite the explosive growth  more than 60% of online americans have still never heard of blogs  the survey found. blogs  or web logs  are online spaces in which people can publish their thoughts  opinions or spread news events in their own words. companies such as google and microsoft provide users with the tools to publish their own blogs.  the rise of blogs has spawned a new desire for immediate news and information  with six million americans now using rss aggregators. rss aggregators are downloaded to pcs and are programmed to subscribe to feeds from blogs  news sites and other websites. the aggregators automatically compile the latest information published online from the blogs or news sites. reading blogs remains far more popular than writing them  the survey found. only 7% of the 120 million us adults who use the internet had created a blog or web-based diary. getting involved is becoming more popular though  with 12% saying they had posted material or comments on other people s blogs.  just under one in 10 of the us s internet users read political blogs such as the daily kos or instapundit during the us presidential campaign. kerry voters were slightly more likely to read them than bush voters. blog creators were likely to be young  well-educated  net-savvy males with good incomes and college educations  the survey found. this was also true of the average blog reader  although the survey found there was a greater than average growth in blog readership among women and those in minorities. the survey was conducted during november and involved telephone surveys of 1 324 internet users.
games help you  learn and play   god games  in which players must control virtual people and societies could be educational  says research.  a us researcher has suggested that games such as the sims could be a good way to teach languages. ravi purushotma believes that the world of the sims can do a better job of teaching vocabulary and grammar than traditional methods. the inherent fun of game playing could help to make learning languages much less of a chore  said mr purushotma.  there must be few parents or teachers that do not worry that the lure of a video game on a computer or console is hard to resist by children that really should be doing their homework. but instead of fearing computer games  ravi purushotma believes that educationalists  particularly language teachers should embrace games.  one goal would be to break what i believe to be the false assumption that learning and play are inherently oppositional   he said. he believes that the  phenomenal ability  of games such as the sims and others to capture the interest of adolescent audiences is ripe for exploitation. the hard part of learning any language  said mr purushotma  were the basic parts of learning what different words refer to and how they are used to build up sentences. boring lessons drumming vocabulary into pupils couched in terms they do not understand has made many languages far harder to learn than they should be.  the way we often teach foreign languages right now is somewhat akin to learning to ride a bike by formally studying gravity   he said.  by contrast  said mr purushotma  learning via something like the sims may mean students do not feel like they are studying at all. this was because the sims does not rely solely on words to get information across to players. instead the actions of its computer controlled people and how they interact with their world often makes clear what is going on. the incidental information about what a sim was doing could reinforce what a player or student was supposed to be learning  said mr purushotma. by contrast many language lessons try to impart information about a tongue with little context. for instance  he said  in a version of the sims adapted to teach german  if a player misunderstood what was meant by the word  energie  the actions of a tired sim  stumbling then falling asleep  would illustrate the meaning. if necessary detailed textual information could be called upon to aid players  or students  understanding.  one of the drawbacks of the sims  said mr purushotma  was the lack of spoken language to help people brush up on pronunciation. however  online versions of the sims  in which people have to move in  meet the neighbours and get to know the local town  could be adapted to help this. although not wishing to claim that he is the first to suggest using a game can help people learn  mr purushotma believes that educationalists have missed the potential they have to help.  getting a simulated person to perform everyday activities in a make-believe world and having them described in a foreign language could be a powerful learning aid  he believes. before now  he said  educational software titles suffer by comparison with the slick graphics and rich worlds found in games. but  he said  using pre-prepared game worlds such as the sims has never been easier because tools have been made by its creators and fans that make it easy to modify almost any part of the game. this could make it easy for teachers to adapt parts of the game for their own lessons.  i m hoping now to re-create a well-polished german learning mod for the sequel by this summer   he told the bbc news website.  i m encouraged to hear that others are thinking of experimenting with japanese and spanish.  earlier work with a colleague on using civilisation iii to teach students about history showed that it could be a powerful way to get them to realise that solving a society s problems can not always come from making a single change. a report on the experiment said:  students began asking historical and geographical questions in the context of game play  using geography and history as tools for their game  and drawing inferences about social phenomena based on their play.  mr purushotma s ideas were aired in an article for the journal language learning and technology.
progress on new internet domains by early 2005 the net could have two new domain names.  the .post and .travel net domains have been given preliminary approval by the net s administrative body. the names are just two of a total of 10 proposed domains that are being considered by the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers  icann. the other proposed names include a domain for pornography  asia  mobile phones  an anti-spam domain and one for the catalan language and culture.  the .post domain is backed by the universal postal union that wants to use it as the online marker for every type of postal service and to help co-ordinate the e-commerce efforts of national post offices.  the .travel domain would be used by hotels  travel firms  airlines  tourism offices and would help such organisations distinguish themselves online. it is backed by a new york-based trade group called the travel partnership. icann said its early decision on the two domains was in response to the detailed technical and commercial information the organisations behind the names had submitted. despite this initial approval  icann cautioned that there was no guarantee that the domains would actually go into service. at the same time icann is considering proposals for another eight domains. one that may not win approval is a proposal to set up a .xxx domain for pornographic websites. a similar proposal has been made many times in the past. but icann has been reluctant to approve it because of the difficulty of making pornographers sign up and use it. in 2000 icann approved seven other new domains that have had varying degrees of success. three of the new so-called top level domains were for specific industries or organisations such as .museum and .aero. others such as .info and .biz were intended to be more generic. in total there are in excess of 200 domain names and the majority of these are for nations. but domains that end in the .com suffix are by far the most numerous.
ultimate game  award for doom 3 sci-fi shooter doom 3 has blasted away the competition at a major games ceremony  the golden joystick awards.  it was the only title to win twice  winning ultimate game of the year and best pc game at the awards  presented by little britain star matt lucas. the much-anticipated sci-fi horror doom 3 shot straight to the top of the uk games charts on its release in august. other winners included grand theft auto: san andreas which took the most wanted for christmas prize. only released last week  it was closely followed by halo 2 and half-life 2  which are expected to be big hits when they are unleashed later this month.  but they missed out on the prize for the most wanted game of 2005  which went to the nintendo title  the legend of zelda. the original doom  released in 1994  heralded a new era in computer games and introduced 3d graphics. it helped to establish the concept of the first-person shooter. doom 3 was developed over four years and is thought to have cost around $15m (£8.3m). the top honour for the best online game of the year went to battlefield vietnam. the chronicles of riddick: escape from butcher bay was handed the unsung hero game of 2004. its release was somewhat eclipsed by doom 3  which was released on the same week. it was  however  very well received by gamers and was praised for its storyline which differed from the film released around the same time. electronic arts was named top publisher of the year  taking the crown from nintendo which won in 2003. the annual awards are voted for by more than 200 000 readers of computer and video games magazines. games awards like this have grown in importance. over the last six years  the uk market for games grew by 100% and was worth a record £1 152m in 2003  according to a recent report by analysts screen digest.
bush website blocked outside us surfers outside the us have been unable to visit the official re-election site of president george w bush.  the blocking of browsers sited outside the us began in the early hours of monday morning. since then people outside the us trying to browse the site get a message saying they are not authorised to view it. the blocking does not appear to be due to an attack by vandals or malicious hackers  but as a result of a policy decision by the bush camp.  the international exclusion zone around georgewbush.com was spotted by net monitoring firm netcraft which keeps an eye on traffic patterns across many different sites. netcraft said that since the early hours of 25 october attempts to view the site through its monitoring stations in london  amsterdam and sydney failed.  by contrast netcraft s four monitoring stations in the us managed to view the site with no problems. the site can still be seen using anonymous proxy services that are based in the us. some web users in canada also report that they can browse the site. the pattern of traffic to the website suggests that the blocking was not due to an attack by vandals or politically motivated hackers. geographic blocking works because the numerical addresses that the net uses to organise itself are handed out on a regional basis. on 21 october  the george w bush website began using the services of a company called akamai to ensure that the pages  videos and other content on its site reaches visitors. mike prettejohn  president of netcraft  speculated that the blocking decision might have been taken to cut costs  and traffic  in the run-up to the election on 2 november. he said the site may see no reason to distribute content to people who will not be voting next week. managing traffic could also be a good way to ensure that the site stays working in the closing days of the election campaign. however  simply blocking non-us visitors also means that americans overseas are barred too. akamai declined to comment  saying it could not talk about customer websites.
tough rules for ringtone sellers firms that flout rules on how ringtones and other mobile extras are sold could be cut off from all uk phone networks.  the rules allow offenders to be cut off if they do not let consumers know exactly what they get for their money and how to turn off the services. the first month under the new rules has seen at least ten firms suspended while they clean up the way they work. the rules have been brought in to ensure that the problems plaguing net users do not spread to mobile phones.  in the last couple of years ringtones  wallpapers  screensavers and lots of other extras for phones have become hugely popular. but fierce competition is making it difficult for firms to get their wares in front of consumers  said jeremy flynn  head of third party services at vodafone.   if you are not on the operator s portal you are going to have quite heavy marketing costs because it s a problem of how people discover your services   he said. to combat this many ringtone and other mobile content sellers started using a new tactic to squeeze more cash out of customers. this tactic involved signing people up for a subscription to give them  for instance  several ringtones per week or month instead of the single track they thought they were getting. mr flynn said that the move to using subscriptions happened over the space of a few weeks at the end of 2004. websites such as grumbletext.co.uk started getting reports from customers who were racking up large bills for phone content they did not know they had signed up for.  what made us uncomfortable was that these services were not being marketed transparently   said mr flynn.  people did not know they were being offered a subscription service.   we saw potential for substantial consumer harm here   he added.  the swift adoption of subscription services led to the creation of a new code of conduct for firms that want to sell content for mobile phones. the drafting of the new rules was led by the mobile entertainment forum and the uk s phone firms.  everyone is required to conform to this code of conduct   said andrew bud  regulatory head of the mef and executive chairman of messaging firm mblox.   it s all about transparency   he said.  consumers have to be told what they have got themselves into and how to get out of it.   the consumer has a right to be protected   he said. christian harris  partnership manager of mobile content firm zed  said the new system was essential if consumers were to trust companies that sell ringtones and other downloads.  the groundrules must be applied across the whole industry and if that s done effectively we will see the cowboys driven out   he said. the new rules came in to force on 15 january and the first month under the new regime has seen many firms cautioned for not honouring them. some have been told to revamp websites so customers know what they get for their money and what they are signing up for  said mr flynn. also  said mr flynn  vodafone has briefly cut off between eight and ten content sellers flouting the rules.  we have quite draconian contracts with firms   he said.  we do not have to say why. we can just cut them off.  under the rules consumers must be able to switch off the services by using a universal  stop  command sent via text message. he said the system had been designed to limit how much a consumer will pay if they inadvertently signed up for a service.  the mobile is so personal that people really resent the abuse of what is effectively part of their personality   said mr flynn.
millions to miss out on the net by 2025  40% of the uk s population will still be without internet access at home  says a study.  around 23 million britons will miss out on a wide range of essential services such as education and medical information  predicts the report by telecoms giant bt. it compares to 27 million  or 50%  of the uk  who are not currently online. the idea that the digital divide will evaporate with time is  wishful thinking   the report concludes.  the study calls on the government and telecoms industry to come up with new ways to lure those that have been bypassed by the digital revolution. although the percentage of britons without home access will have fallen slightly  those that remain digital refuseniks will miss out on more  the report suggests. as more and more everyday tasks move online and offline services become less comprehensive  the divide will become more obvious and more burdensome for those that have not got net access  it predicts.  the gap between  have-nets  and  have-nots  has been much talked about  but predictions about how such a divide will affect future generations has been less discussed. bt set out to predict future patterns based on current information and taking account of the way technology is changing. optimists who predict that convergence and the emergence of more user-friendly technology will bridge the digital divide could be way off mark  the report suggests.  internet access on other devices tends to be something taken up by those who already have it   said adrian hosford  director of corporate responsibility at bt. costs of internet access have fallen dramatically and coverage in remote areas have vastly improved over the last year but the real barrier remains psychological.  there is a hard rump of have-nots who are not engaging with the net. they don t have the motivation or skills or perceive the benefits   said mr hosford.  as now  the most disadvantaged groups are likely to remain among low income families  the older generation and the disabled.  those on low incomes will account for a quarter of the digital have-nots  the disabled will make up 16% and the elderly nearly a third by 2025  the report forecasts. organisations such as bt have a responsibility to help tackle the problem  said mr hosford. the telco has seen positive results with its everybody online project which offers internet access to people in eight deprived communities around britain. in one area of cornwall with high levels of unemployment  online training helped people rewrite cvs and learn skills to get new jobs  explained mr hosford. such grassroot activity addressing the specific needs of individual communities is essential is the problem of the digital divide is to be overcome  he said.  if we don t address this problem now  it will get a lot worse and people will find it more difficult to find jobs  education opportunities will be limited and they ll simply not be able to keep up with society   he said. the alliance for digital inclusion  an independent body with members drawn from government  industry and the voluntary sector has recently been set up to tackle some of the issues faced by the digital refuseniks.
ultimate game  award for doom 3 sci-fi shooter doom 3 has blasted away the competition at a major games ceremony  the golden joystick awards.  it was the only title to win twice  winning ultimate game of the year and best pc game at the awards  presented by little britain star matt lucas. the much-anticipated sci-fi horror doom 3 shot straight to the top of the uk games charts on its release in august. other winners included grand theft auto: san andreas which took the most wanted for christmas prize. only released last week  it was closely followed by halo 2 and half-life 2  which are expected to be big hits when they are unleashed later this month.  but they missed out on the prize for the most wanted game of 2005  which went to the nintendo title  the legend of zelda. the original doom  released in 1994  heralded a new era in computer games and introduced 3d graphics. it helped to establish the concept of the first-person shooter. doom 3 was developed over four years and is thought to have cost around $15m (£8.3m). the top honour for the best online game of the year went to battlefield vietnam. the chronicles of riddick: escape from butcher bay was handed the unsung hero game of 2004. its release was somewhat eclipsed by doom 3  which was released on the same week. it was  however  very well received by gamers and was praised for its storyline which differed from the film released around the same time. electronic arts was named top publisher of the year  taking the crown from nintendo which won in 2003. the annual awards are voted for by more than 200 000 readers of computer and video games magazines. games awards like this have grown in importance. over the last six years  the uk market for games grew by 100% and was worth a record £1 152m in 2003  according to a recent report by analysts screen digest.
mobile gaming takes off in india gaming on the move is one of the fastest-growing activities among the tech-savvy in india  says a report.  the indian mobile gaming market is expected to generate about $26m (£13.8m) by the end of 2004  according to market analysts in-stat/mdr. in october  mobile phone users grew by 1.4 million to 44.9 million  overtaking the number of landlines  said the telecom regulatory authority of india. analysts say cheap rates and a huge youth market is driving the market. india has a large population of under-25s  and many in urban areas are fast adopting mobiles as must-have gadgets.  india s mobile gaming market will bring in about $336m (£178m) by 2009  according to the report. mobile gaming is expected to explode globally over the next few years. analysts predict that 220 million people will be playing games on phones by 2009  generating billions for mobile companies.  services other than just voice calls which are offered by mobile operators in india have  as a result of the huge rise in subscribers  grown significantly and rapidly.  the growth of this market sector has attracted publishers  developers  animators  musicians  and content providers  and is also stimulating the development of innovative business models   said clint wheelock  director of in-stat/mdr s wireless research group.   mobile gaming is not just about fun; it also represents one key element of a rich mobile entertainment experience for consumers  and a lucrative market opportunity for industry players.  currently  india has six big games developers and four mobile operators that offer games to their subscribers  said the report. according to in-stat/mdr  it is tipped to make up one of the most important markets in the next wave of mobile multimedia growth.  in january 2003  there were only 10 million mobile subscribers in india. many choose mobiles in rural areas in order to bypass poorer telecoms infrastructure. despite this  the penetration rate is still much lower that other countries. less than 20% of india s total population own a mobile in india  compared to well over 50% in most european countries. the trend echoes the uptake of mobiles in many developing economies  which continues to grow as people opt to leapfrog slower and more expensive state-run fixed-line operators.
podcasts mark rise of diy radio an apple ipod or other digital music players can hold anything up to 10 000 songs  which is a lot of space to fill.  but more and more ipod owners are filling that space with audio content created by an unpredictable assortment of producers. it is called  podcasting  and its strongest proponent is former mtv host and vj (video jockey) adam curry. podcasting takes its name from the apple ipod  although you do not need an ipod to create one or to listen to a podcast. a podcast is basically an internet-based radio show which podcasters create  usually in the comfort of their own home. they need only a microphone  a pc  and some editing software. they then upload their shows to the internet and others can download and listen to them  all for free. using technology based on xml computer code and rss - really simple syndication - listeners can subscribe to podcasts collected automatically in a bit of software  which mr curry has pioneered. the latest mp3 files of shows can then be picked up by a music playing device automatically.  mr curry records  hosts  edits and produce a daily  40 minute podcast called the daily source code. he wants to make podcasting  the next big thing  and says it is an extension of his childhood love of radio gadgetry.  i was always into technologies and wires   he explains.  my parents gave me the radio shack 101 project kit  which allows you to build an am transmitter and subsequently an fm transmitter.  i had my mom drive me around the block  see how far it would reach on the car radio.   mr curry is american  but he grew up in the netherlands where he hosted illegal  pirate radio shows in the dutch capital. he tried university in the us  and ended up back in holland where he hosted a music video show. he spent the next seven years in new york where he worked at mtv hosting the top 20 video countdown  but spent most of his hours tinkering with this new thing called the internet.  at a certain point in 1995  i was driving in on a friday afternoon  beautiful blue sky  one of those beautiful days thinking  this is so stupid.  you know  i m going do the top 20 countdown  take the cheque  go home  and sit on the internet until three in the morning.  so  after i finished the show  i quit. i said  on air  it s been great  i ve been here for seven years at that point  there s something on the internet  i ve got to go find it  and i ll see you later.   but mr curry s technology and broadcast interests started to gel a couple of years ago when computer storage was growing exponentially and high-speed internet connections were becoming more widely available. the mp3 format also meant that people could create and upload audio more cheaply and efficiently than ever before.  most importantly  mr curry says  people across the globe were bored with the radio they were hearing.  listen to 99% of the radio that you hear today  it s radio voices  and it s fake  it s just fake.  he wanted to make it easier for people to find  real voices  on the internet. he wanted software that would automatically download new audio content directly onto players like  ipods. mr curry is not a computer programmer  so he asked others to create one for him. no one did  so he tried to write one himself. he finished it a few months ago and says it  totally sucked.  he put it up on the net as open source software and now dozens of coders and audio junkies are refining it; the result is a work in progress called  ipodder . doug kaye  a california-based podcaster  praises the former mtv vj for what he has done.  adam created a simple script that solved what we call the last mile problem. ipodder takes audio from the web and brings it all the way down to the mp3 player   he explains.  people can wake up in the morning  pick up their ipods as they go to work or before they go exercise  and discover that there s all this new content automatically put onto their players.  it is created an explosion in podcasting content and podcasters are springing up in australia  finland  brazil  even malaysia. one couple broadcasts theirs  the dawn and drew show  from wisconsin in the us  sometimes even from the comfort of their own bed. topics range from the comfort of their bed  to the latest films or music and have thousands of listeners.  already  websites are springing up that point listeners in the right direction of good podcasts.  chris mcintyre runs podcast alley and says that there are good sites out there but that not everyone has the technological know-how to simply listen.  if i were to tell my mom  or my mother-in-law to copy an xml or rss file to their podcast aggregator  they would think i was speaking a foreign language   mr mcintyre says. along with technical challenges  there may be legal challenges to podcasters who air their favourite  albeit copyrighted  music. some in podcasting also worry that too much attention may turn what they see as the  anti-radio  into something that is more like conventional broadcasting. already there is interest in podcasting from the corporate world. heineken is doing its own podcast now  and so is playboy. for his part  adam curry s pressing ahead with his own vision of what podcasting should be. he loves doing the daily source code because it is about introducing good music and cool ideas to new audiences. he has even been called the ed sullivan or johnny carson of podcasting which  he says   is a badge i ll wear with great honour.  to be the johnny carson  or ed sullivan of anything is wonderful. and you know what  you don t need a hell of a lot of talent.  you just have to be nice  have your ears open  and let people shine. and that s good for me.   clark boyd is technology correspondent for the world  a bbc world service and wgbh-boston co-production.
britons fed up with net service a survey conducted by pc pro magazine has revealed that many britons are unhappy with their internet service.  they are fed up with slow speeds  high prices and the level of customer service they receive. 17% of readers have switched suppliers and a further 16% are considering changing in the near future. it is particularly bad news for bt  the uk s biggest internet supplier  with almost three times as many people trying to leave as joining.  a third of the 2 000 broadband users interviewed were fed up with their current providers but this could be just the tip of the iceberg thinks tim danton  editor of pc pro magazine.  we expect these figures to leap in 2005. every month the prices drop  and more and more people are trying to switch   he said. the survey found that bt and tiscali have been actively dissuading customers from leaving by offering them a lower price when they phone up to cancel their subscription. some readers were offered a price drop just 25p more expensive than that offered by an alternative operator  making it hardly worth while swapping.  other found themselves tied into 12-month contracts. broadband has become hugely competitive and providers are desperate to hold on to customers. 12% of those surveyed found themselves unable to swap at all.  we discovered a huge variety of problems  but one of the biggest issues is the current supplier withholding the information that people need to give to their new supplier   said tim danton  editor of pc pro.  this breaks the code of practice  but because that code is voluntary there s nothing we or ofcom can do to help   he said. there is a vast choice of internet service providers in the uk now and an often bewildering array of broadband packages. with prices set to drop even further in coming months mr danton advises everyone to shop around carefully.  if you just stick with your current connection then there s every chance you re being ripped off   he warned.
more women turn to net security older people and women are increasingly taking charge of protecting home computers against malicious net attacks  according to a two-year study.  the number of women buying programs to protect pcs from virus  spam and spyware attacks rose by 11.2% each year between 2002 and 2004. the study  for net security firm preventon  shows that security messages are reaching a diversity of surfers. it is thought that 40% of those buying home net security programs are retired. for the last three years  that has gone up by an average of 13.2%. but more retired women (53%) were buying security software than retired men. the research reflects the changing stereotype and demographics of web users  as well as growing awareness of the greater risks that high-speed broadband net connections can pose to surfers.  the study predicts that 40% of all home pc net security buyers will be women in 2005. they could even overtake men as the main buyers by 2007  if current rates persist  according to the research.  i think older people have become more vigilant about protecting their pcs as we tend to be more cautious and want an insurance policy in case something does go wrong   said one over-60 woman who took part in the research.   you started off with young male stereotype computer users for last 10 years   paul goosens  head of preventon told the bbc news website.  now we are seeing real people - both sexes and very often it is women who have more access at home.  but net service providers still need to take more responsibility in making sure people are educated about net threats before they go online  particuarly if they are new to broadband  he said.  programs also need to be tailored so that they can be installed by dial-up users with a slower connection too  said mr goosens. security software should be easy to use  with simple interfaces and instructions written in non-technical language  he added. the nature of the security threats are also becoming more than just about e-mail viruses. high-profile complaints about rogue diallers  and spyware or other programs that surreptitiously install themselves on computers  have also raised awareness about the need to have a combination of anti-virus  firewall and spyware-removal programs too. without protection  these kinds of programs can be picked up just through surfing the web normally.  more than 30 000 pcs a day globally are being recruited into networks that spread spam and viruses  a study from security from symantec showed last year. viruses written to make headlines by infecting millions are also getting rarer  according to net security experts. programs are being unleashed to directly profit criminal gangs  many based in eastern europe  over those which are designed to show off technical skills or cause nuisance. the research shows that more people are taking these criminal net threats more seriously because  said mr goosens  they are reported in the press much more.  you are seeing older users being educated by the media and are seeing them picking up on this threat. they are asking the right questions   he explained.  it is more likely the younger users who naively assume that because they are using a reputable service provider  that they are safe to connect to the net.  an unprotected computer on a broadband connection can be breached and infected with viruses or spyware within minutes. by the end of the year it is thought that more than 30% of uk homes will have broadband net access. in july last year  the number of uk households accessing the net via broadband surpassed those using dial-up for the first time  according to the office of national statistics.
doors open at biggest gadget fair thousands of technology lovers and industry experts have gathered in las vegas for the annual consumer electronics show (ces).  the fair showcases the latest technologies and gadgets that will hit the shops in the next year. about 50 000 new products will be unveiled as the show unfolds. microsoft chief bill gates is to make a pre-show keynote speech on wednesday when he is expected to announce details of the next generation xbox.  the thrust of this year s show will be on technologies which put people in charge of multimedia content so they can store  listen to  and watch what they want on devices any time  anywhere. about 120 000 people are expected to attend the trade show which stretches over more than 1.5 million square feet. highlights will include the latest trends in digital imaging  storage technologies  thinner flat screen and high-definition tvs  wireless and portable technologies  gaming  and broadband technologies. the show also includes several speeches from key technology companies such as intel  microsoft  and hewlett packard among others.  the story this year remains all about digital and how that is completely transforming and revolutionising products and the way people interact with them   jeff joseph  from the consumer electronics association (cea) told the bbc news website.  it is about personalisation - taking your mp3 player and creating your own playlist  taking your digital video recorder and watch what you want to watch when - you are no longer at the whim of the broadcasters.   consumer electronics and gadgets had a phenomenal year in 2004  according to figures released by ces organisers  the cea  on tuesday. the gadget explosion signalled the strongest growth yet in the us in 2004. shipments of consumer electronics rose by almost 11% between 2003 and 2004. that trend is predicted to continue  according to cea analysts  with wholesale shipments of consumer technologies expected to grow by 11% again in 2005. the fastest-growing technologies in 2004 included blank dvd media  liquid crystal display (lcd) tvs  digital video recorders (dvrs)  and portable music players.  this year we will really begin to see that come to life in what we call place shifting - so if you have your pvr [personal video recorder] in your living room  you can move that content around the house.  some exhibitors will be showcasing how you can take that content anywhere   said mr joseph. he said the products which will be making waves in the next year will be about the  democratisation  of content - devices and technologies that will give people the freedom to do more with music  video  and images. there will also be more focus on the design of technologies  following the lead that apple s ipod made  with ease of use and good looks which appeal to a wider range of people a key concern.  the cea predicted that there would be several key technology trends to watch in the coming year. gaming would continue to thrive  especially on mobile devices  and would reach out to more diverse gamers such as women. games consoles sales have been declining  but the launch of next generation consoles  such as microsoft s xbox and playstation  could buoy up sales. although it has been widely predicted that mr gates would be showcasing the new xbox  some media reports have cast doubt on what he would be talking about in the keynote. some have suggested the announcement may take place at the games developers conference in the summer instead. with more than 52% of us homes expected to have home networks  the cea suggested hard drive boxes - or media servers - capable of storing thousands of images  video and audio files to be accessed through other devices around the home  will be more commonplace. portable devices that combine mobile telephony  digital music and video players  will also be more popular in 2005. their popularity will be driven by more multimedia content and services which will let people watch and listen to films  tv  and audio wherever they are. this means more storage technologies will be in demand  such as external hard drives  and flash memory like sd cards. ces runs officially from 6 to 9 january.
us peer-to-peer pirates convicted the first convictions for piracy over peer-to-peer networks have been handed down in the us.  new yorker william trowbridge and texan michael chicoine have pleaded guilty to charges that they infringed copyright by illegally sharing music  movies and software. the two men faced charges following raids in august on suspected pirates by the fbi. the pair face jail terms of up to five years and a $250 000 (£130 000) fine.  in a statement the us department of justice said the two men operated the central hubs in a piracy community organised across the direct connect peer-to-peer network. the piracy group called itself the underground network and membership of it demanded that users share between one and 100 gigabytes of files. direct connect allows users to set themselves up as central servers that act as co-ordinating spots for sharers. users would swap files  such as films and music  by exchanging data over the network. during its investigation fbi agents reportedly downloaded 84 movies  40 software programs  13 games and 178  sound recordings  from the five hubs that made up the larger piracy group. the raids were organised under the umbrella of operation digital gridlock which was aimed at fighting  criminal copyright theft on peer-to-peer networks . in total  six raids were carried out in august. five were on the homes of suspected copyright thieves and one on a net service firm. the department of justice said that both men pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit felony copyright infringement. they also pleaded guilty to acting for commercial advantage. the two men are due to be sentenced on 29 april.
souped-up wi-fi is on the horizon super high-speed wireless data networks could soon be in use in the uk.  the government s wireless watchdog is seeking help on the best way to regulate the technology behind such networks called ultra wideband (uwb). ofcom wants to ensure that the arrival of uwb-using devices does not cause problems for those that already use the same part of the radio spectrum. uwb makes it possible to stream huge amounts of data through the air over short distances. one of the more likely uses of uwb is to make it possible to send dvd quality video images wirelessly to tv screens or to let people beam music to media players around their home. the technology has the potential to transmit hundreds of megabits of data per second. uwb could also be used to create so-called personal area networks that let a person s gadgets quickly and easily swap data amongst themselves. the technology works over a range up to 10 metres and uses billions of short radio pulses every second to carry data. at the recent consumer electronics show in las vegas products with uwb chips built-in got their first public airing.  currently  use of uwb is only allowed in the uk under a strict licencing scheme.  we re seeking opinion from industry to find out whether or not we should allow uwb on a licence-exempt basis   said a spokesman for ofcom.  companies have until 24 march to respond. in april the ec is due to start its own consultation on europe-wide adoption of uwb. the cross-europe body for radio regulators  known as the european conference of postal and telecommunications administrations (cept)  is carrying out research for this harmonisation programme. early sight of the cept work has caused controversy as some think it over-emphasises uwb s potential to interfere with existing users. by contrast a preliminary ofcom report found that it would be quite straight-forward to deploy uwb without causing problems for those that already use it. the ofcom spokesman said it was considering imposing a  mask  or set of technical restrictions on uwb-using devices.  we would want these devices to have very strict controls on power levels so they can not transmit a long way or over a wide area   he said. despite the current restrictions the technology is already being used. cambridge-based ubisense has about 40 customers around the world using the short-range radio technology  said david theriault  standards and regulatory liaison for ubisense. he said that uwb was driving novel ways to interact with computers.  it s like having a 3d mouse all the time   he said. he said that european decisions on what to do with uwb allied with ieee decisions on the exact specifications for it would help drive adoption. prior to its adoption as a way for gadgets and computers to communicate  uwb was used as a sensing technology. it is used to spot such things as cracks under the surface of runways or to help firemen detect people through walls.
cyber crime booms in 2004 the last 12 months have seen a dramatic growth in almost every security threat that plague windows pcs.  the count of known viruses broke the 100 000 barrier and the number of new viruses grew by more than 50%. similarly phishing attempts  in which conmen try to trick people into handing over confidential data  are recording growth rates of more than 30% and attacks are becoming increasingly sophisticated. also on the increase are the number of networks of remotely controlled computers  called bot nets  used by malicious hackers and conmen to carry out many different cyber crimes.  one of the biggest changes of 2004 was the waning influence of the boy hackers keen to make a name by writing a fast-spreading virus  said kevin hogan  senior manager in symantec s security response group. although teenage virus writers will still play around with malicious code  said mr hogan  2004 saw a significant rise in criminal use of malicious programs. the financial incentives were driving criminal use of technology  he said. his comment was echoed by graham cluley  senior technology consultant from anti-virus firm sophos. mr cluley said:  when the commercial world gets involved  things really get nasty. virus writers and hackers will be looking to make a tidy sum.   in particular  phishing attacks  which typically use fake versions of bank websites to grab login details of customers  boomed during 2004. web portal lycos europe reported a 500% increase in the number of phishing e-mail messages it was catching. the anti-phishing working group reported that the number of phishing attacks against new targets was growing at a rate of 30% or more per month. those who fall victim to these attacks can find that their bank account has been cleaned out or that their good name has been ruined by someone stealing their identity. this change in the ranks of virus writers could mean the end of the mass-mailing virus which attempts to spread by tricking people into opening infected attachments on e-mail messages.  they are not an efficient way of spreading viruses   said mr hogan.  they are very noisy and they are not technically challenging.  the opening months of 2004 did see the appearance of the netsky  bagle and mydoom mass mailers  but since then more surreptitious viruses  or worms  have dominated.  mr hogan said worm writers were more interested in recruiting pcs to take part in  bot nets  that can be used to send out spam or to mount attacks on websites.  in september symantec released statistics which showed that the numbers of active  bot computers  rose from 2 000 to 30 000 per day. thanks to these  bot nets   spam continued to be a problem in 2004. anti-spam firms report that  in many cases  legitimate e-mail has shrunk to less than 30% of messages. part of the reason that these  bot nets  have become so prevalent  he said  was due to a big change in the way that many viruses were created. in the past many viruses  such as netsky  have been the work of an individual or group. by contrast  said mr hogan  the code for viruses such as gaobot  spybot and randex were commonly held and many groups work on them to produce new variants at the same time. the result is that now there are more than 3 000 variations of the spybot worm.  that s unprecedented   said mr hogan.  what makes it difficult is that they are all co-existing with each other and do not exist in an easy to understand chronology.   the emergence of the first proper virus for mobile phones was also seen in 2004.  in the past  threats to smart phones have been largely theoretical because the viruses created to cripple phones existed only in the laboratory rather than the wild. in june  the cabir virus was discovered that can hop from phone to phone using bluetooth short-range radio technology. also released this year was the mosquito game for symbian phones which surreptitiously sends messages to premium rate numbers  and in november the skulls trojan came to light which can cripple phones. on the positive side  finnish security firm f-secure said that 2004 was the best-ever year for the capture  arrest and sentencing of virus writers and criminally-minded hackers. in total  eight virus writers were arrested and some members of the so-called 29a virus writing group were sentenced. one high-profile arrest was that of german teenager sven jaschen who confessed to be behind the netsky and sasser virus families. also shut down were the carderplanet and shadowcrew websites that were used to trade stolen credit card numbers.
british library gets wireless net visitors to the british library will be able to get wireless internet access alongside the extensive information available in its famous reading rooms.  broadband wireless connectivity will be made available in the eleven reading rooms  the auditorium  caf&#233;  restaurant  and outdoor piazza area. a study revealed that 86% of visitors to the library carried laptops. the technology has been on trial since may and usage levels make the library london s most active public hotspot.  previously many were leaving the building to go to a nearby internet caf&#233; to access their e-mail  the study found.  at the british library we are continually exploring ways in which technology can help us to improve services to our users   said lynne brindley  chief executive of the british library.  surveys we conducted recently confirmed that  alongside the materials they consult here  our users want to be able to access the internet when they are at the library for research or to communicate with colleagues   she said. the service will be priced at £4.50 for an hour s session or £35 for a monthly pass. the study  conducted by consultancy building zones  found that 16% of visitors came to the library to sit down and use it as a business centre. this could be because of its proximity to busy mainline stations such as kings cross and euston. the study also found that people were spending an average of six hours in the building  making it an ideal wireless hotspot. since may the service has registered 1 200 sessions per week  making it london s most active public hotspot. the majority of visitors wanted to be able to access their e-mail as well as the british library catalogue. the service has been rolled out in partnership with wireless provider the cloud and hewlett packard.  it will operate independently from the library s existing network. the british library receives around 3 000 visitors each day and serves around 500 000 readers each year. people come to view resources which include the world s largest collection of patents and the uk s most extensive collection of science  technology and medical information. the library receives between three and four million requests from remote users around the world each year.
anti-spam laws bite spammer hard the net s self-declared spam king is seeking bankruptcy protection.  scott richter  the man behind optinrealbig.com and billions of junk mail messages  said lawsuits had forced the company into chapter 11. optinrealbig was fighting several legal battles  most notably against microsoft  which is pushing for millions of dollars in damages. the company said filing for chapter 11 would help it try to resolve its legal problems but still keep trading.  listed as the third biggest spammer in the world by junk mail watchdog spamhaus  optinrealbig was sued in december 2003 for sending mail messages that violated anti-spam laws. the lawsuit was brought by microsoft and new york attorney general eliot spitzer who alleged that mr richter and his accomplices sent billions of spam messages through 514 compromised net addresses in 35 countries. according to microsoft the messages were sent via net addresses owned by the kuwait ministries of communication and finance  several korean schools  the seoul municipal boramae hospital  and the virginia community college system. mr richter settled the attorney general case in july 2004 but the legal fight with microsoft is continuing. microsoft is seeking millions in dollars in damages from optinrealbig under anti-spam laws that impose penalties for every violation. in a statement announcing the desire to seek bankruptcy protection the company said it:  could not continue to contend with legal maneuvers (sic) by a number of companies across the country  including microsoft  and still run a viable business.  in its chapter 11 filing optinrealbig claimed it had assets of less than $10m (£5.29m) but debts of more than $50m which included the $46m that microsoft is seeking via its lawsuit.  the litigation has been a relentless distraction with which to contend   said steven richter  legal counsel for optinrealbig.  but  make no mistake  we do expect to prevail.  for its part optinrealbig describes itself as a premier internet marketing company and said the move to seek chapter 11 was necessary to let it keep trading while sorting out its legal battles.
rich pickings for hi-tech thieves viruses  trojans and other malicious programs sent on to the net to catch you out are undergoing a subtle change.  the shift is happening as tech savvy criminals turn to technology to help them con people out of cash  steal valuable data or take over home pcs. viruses written to make headlines by infecting millions are getting rarer. instead programs are now crafted for directly criminal ends and firms are tightening up networks with defences to combat the new wave of malicious code.  the growing criminal use of malware has meant the end of the neat categorisation of different sorts of viruses and malicious programs. before now it has been broadly possible to name and categorise viruses by the method they use to spread and how they infect machines. but many of the viruses written by criminals roll lots of technical tricks together into one nasty package.   you cannot put them in to the neat little box that you used to   said pete simpson  head of the threat laboratory at security firm clearswift. now viruses are just as likely to spread by themselves like worms  or to exploit loopholes in browsers or hide in e-mail message attachments.  it s about outright criminality now   said mr simpson  explaining why this change has come about. he said many of the criminal programs came from eastern europe where cash-rich organised gangs can find a ready supply of technical experts that will crank out code to order. former virus writer marek strihavka  aka benny from the 29a virus writing group  recently quit the malware scene partly because it was being taken over by spyware writers  phishing gangs  and spammers who are more interested in money rather than the technology. no longer do virus writers produce programs to show off their technical prowess to rivals in the underground world of malware authors. not least  said paul king  principal security consultant at cisco  because the defences against such attacks are so common.  in many ways the least likely way to do it is e-mail because most of us have got anti-virus and firewalls now   he said. few of the malicious programs written by hi-tech thieves are cleverly written  many are much more pragmatic and use tried and tested techniques to infect machines or to trick users into installing a program or handing over important data.  if you think of criminals they do not do clever   said mr king   they just do what works.   as the tactics used by malicious programs change  said mr king  so many firms were changing the way they defend themselves. now many scan machines that connect to the corporate networks to ensure they have not been compromised while off the core network.  many will not let a machine connect and a worker get on with their job before the latest patches and settings have been uploaded. as well as using different tactics  criminals also use technology for reasons that are much more transparent.  the main motivation now is money   said gary stowell  spokesman for st bernard software. mr stowell said organised crime gangs were turning to computer crime because the risks of being caught were low and the rates of return were very high. with almost any phishing or spyware attack  criminals are guaranteed to catch some people out and have the contacts to exploit what they recover. so-called spyware was proving very popular with criminals because it allowed them to take over machines for their own ends  to steal key data from users or to hijack web browsing sessions to point people at particular sites. in some cases spyware was being written that searched for rival malicious programs on pcs it infects and then trying to erase them so it has sole ownership of that machine.
playstation 3 processor unveiled the cell processor  which will drive sony s playstation 3  will run 10-times faster than current pc chips  its designers have said.  sony  ibm and toshiba  who have been working on the cell processor for three years  unveiled the chip on monday. it is being designed for use in graphics workstations  the new playstation console  and has been described as a supercomputer on a chip. the chip will run at speeds of greater than 4 ghz  the firms said. by comparison  rival chip maker intel s fastest processor runs at 3.8 ghz. details of the chip were released at the international solid state circuits conference in san francisco. the new processor is set to ignite a fresh battle between intel and the cell consortium over which processor sits at the centre of digital products. the playstation 3 is expected in 2006  while toshiba plans to incorporate it into high-end televisions next year. ibm has said it will sell a workstation with the chip starting later this year.  cell is comprised of several computing engines  or cores. a core based on ibm s power architecture controls eight  synergistic  processing centres. in all  they can simultaneously carry out 10 instruction sequences  compared with two for current intel chips.  later this year  intel and advanced micro devices plan to release their own  multicore  chips  which also increase the number of instructions that can be executed at once. the cell s specifications suggest the playstation 3 will offer a significant boost in graphics capabilities but analysts cautioned that not all the features in a product announcement will find their way into systems.  any new technology like this has two components   said steve kleynhans  an analyst with meta group. he said:  it has the vision of what it could be because you need the big vision to sell it.  then there s the reality of how it s really going to be used  which generally is several levels down the chain from there.   while the playstation 3 is likely to be the first mass-market product to use cell  the chip s designers have said the flexible architecture means that it would be useful for a wide range of applications  from servers to mobile phones. initial devices are unlikely to be any smaller than a games console  however  because the first version of the cell will run hot enough to need a cooling fan. and while marketing speak describes the chip as a  supercomputer  - it remains significantly slower than the slowest computer on the list of the world s top 500 supercomputers. ibm said cell was  os neutral  and would support multiple operating systems simultaneously but designers would not confirm if microsoft s windows was among those tested with the chip. if cell is to challenge intel s range of chips in the marketplace  it will need to find itself inside pcs  which predominantly run using windows.
uk broadband gets speed injection broadband s rapid rise continues apace as speeds gear up a notch.  an eight megabit service has been launched by internet service provider uk online. it is 16 times faster than the average broadband package on the market and will pave the way for services such as video-on-demand and broadband tv. the service is possible due to a new regime which allows other operators to use bt s exchanges and will initially only be available in towns.  it represents a  big leap forward  for broadband  said chris stening  uk online general manager.  the service comes with a hefty £39.99 monthly price tag but will mean users can download mp3s in seconds and offers tv-quality video streaming. the service includes wifi as standard  meaning users can connect multiple pcs  laptops and game consoles from any room in the house. not everybody will be able to take advantage of the service  as it will be restricted to metropolitan areas. the service will initially be available to users within 2km radius of 230 telephone exchanges in areas such as london  birmingham  glasgow and cambridge. that represents about 4.4 million households. the service is possible due to a decision to loosen bt s strangle-hold on telephone exchanges.  the process  known as local loop unbundling  was put in motion by the now defunct telecoms watchdog oftel but has only proved popular in recent months due to falling costs. uk online is looking at the possibility of bundling services such as cheap net telephone calls  video-on-demand and tv by 2005 if the service proves popular.  the service is twice as fast as any other service on offer in the uk and 16 times faster than most broadband services   said mr stening.  it takes a big leap for broadband and we are very excited about it   he said. countries such as south korea and france have found the advantage of upping the speeds of broadband. in south korea  video-on-demand over the net is cheaper than renting a dvd and online gaming is huge. mr stening believes the service will appeal to people in multi-occupancy buildings as well as easing family arguments.  a typical family with two adults and two children is currently sharing a 512 kilobit service. this will basically give them 2 megabits each   he said.
bt offers free net phone calls bt is offering customers free internet telephone calls if they sign up to broadband in december.  the christmas give-away entitles customers to free telephone calls anywhere in the uk via the internet. users will need to use bt s internet telephony software  known as bt communicator  and have a microphone and speakers or headset on their pc. bt has launched the promotion to show off the potential of a broadband connection to customers.  people wanting to take advantage of the offer will need to be a bt together fixed-line customer and will have to sign up to broadband online. the offer will be limited to the first 50 000 people who sign up and there are limitations - the free calls do not include calls to mobiles  non-geographical numbers such as 0870  premium numbers or international numbers. bt is keen to provide extra services to its broadband customers.  people already using bt communicator have found it by far the most convenient way of making a call if they are at their pc   said andrew burke  director of value-added services at bt retail. as more homes get high-speed access  providers are increasingly offering add-ons such as cheap net calls.  broadband and telephony are attractive to customers and bt wants to make sure it is in the first wave of services   said ian fogg  an analyst with jupiter research.  bt communicator had a quiet launch in the summer and now bt is waving the flag a bit more for it   he added.  bt has struggled to maintain its market share of broadband subscribers as more competitors enter the market. reports say that bt has lost around 10% of market share over the last year  down from half of broadband users to less than 40%. bt is hoping its latest offer can persuade more people to jump on the broadband bandwagon. it currently has 1.3 million broadband subscribers.
more power to the people says hp the digital revolution is focused on letting people tell and share their own stories  according to carly fiorina  chief of technology giant hewlett packard.  the job of firms such as hp now  she said in a speech at the consumer electronics show (ces)  was to ensure digital and physical worlds fully converged. she said the goal for 2005 was to make people the centre of technology. ces showcases 50 000 new gadgets that will be hitting the shelves in 2005. the tech-fest  the largest of its kind in the world  runs from 6 to 9 january.  the digital revolution is about the democratisation of technology and the experiences it makes possible   she told delegates.  revolution has always been about giving power to the people.  she added:  the real story of the digital revolution is not just new products  but the millions of experiences made possible and stories that millions can tell.  part of giving people more control has been about the freeing up of content  such as images  video and music. crucial to this has been the effort to make devices that speak to each other better so that content can be more easily transferred from one device  such as a digital camera  to others  such as portable media players. a lot of work still needs to be done  however  to sort out compatibility issues and standards within the technology industry so that gadgets just work seamlessly  she said.  ms fiorina s talk also touted the way technology is being designed to focus on lifestyle  fashion and personalisation  something she sees as key to what people want.  special guest  singer gwen stefani  joined her on-stage to promote her own range of hp digital cameras which ms stefani has helped design and which are heavily influenced by japanese youth culture. the digital cameras  which are due to go on sale in the us by the summer  are based on the hp 607 model. the emphasis on personalisation and lifestyle is a big theme at this year s ces  with tiny  wearable mp3 players at every turn and rainbow hues giving colour to everything. ms fiorina also announced that hp was working with nokia to launch a visual radio service for mobiles  which would launch in europe early this year. the service will let people listen to radio on their mobiles and download relevant content  like a track s ringtone  simultaneously. the service is designed to make mobile radio more interactive.  among the other new products she showcased was the digital media hub  a big upgrade to hp s digital entertainment centre. coming out in the autumn in the us  the box is a networked  high-definition tv  cable set-top box  digital video recorder and dvd recorder. it has a removable hard drive cartridge  memory card slots  and light scribe labelling software which lets people design and print customised dvd labels and covers. it is designed to contain all a household s digital media  such as pre-recorded tv shows  pictures  videos and music so it can all be managed in one place. the hub reflects the increasing move to re-box the pc so that it can work as part of other key centres of entertainment. research suggests that about 258 million images are saved and shared every day  equating to 94 billion a year. eighty per cent of those remain on cameras. media hubs are designed to encourage people to organise them on one box. ms fiorina was one of several keynote speakers  who also included microsoft chief bill gates  to set out what major technology companies think people will be doing with technologies and gadgets in the next 12 months. in a separate announcement during the keynote speech  ms fiorina said that hp would be partnering mtv to replace this year s mtv asia music award. mtv s asia aid will be held in bangkok on 3 february  and is aimed at helping to raise money for the asian tsunami disaster.
ultra fast wi-fi nears completion ultra high speed wi-fi connections moved closer to reality on thursday when intel said it would list standards for the technology later this year.  intel is developing ultra-wideband technology (uwb) which would allow fast data transfer but with low power needs. uwb is tipped to be used for wireless transfer of video in the home or office and for use in wireless usb devices which need low power consumption. a rival uwb standard is being developed by motorola and chip firm freescale. at the mobile phone conference 3gsm in cannes last month samsung demonstrated a phone using uwb technology from freescale.  at a press conference on thursday intel announced that two uwb groups  wimedia alliance and multi-band ofdm alliance had merged to support the technology. uwb makes it possible to stream huge amounts of data through the air over short distances. one of the more likely uses of uwb is to make it possible to send dvd quality video images wirelessly to tv screens or to let people beam music to media players around their home.  the technology has the potential to transmit hundreds of megabits of data per second.  consumer electronics companies want uwb to replace cables and simplify set-up   jeff ravencraft  technology strategist at intel and chairman of the wireless usb promoter group  told technology site zdnet.  thirty percent of consumer electronics returns are because the consumer couldn t set up the equipment.  the first products using uwb technology from intel are due to hit the market later this year. initially they will be products using wireless usb 2.0 connections. uwb could also be used to create so-called personal area networks that let a person s gadgets quickly and easily swap data amongst themselves. the technology works over a range up to 10 metres and uses billions of short radio pulses every second to carry data. intel says the benefit of uwb is that it does not interfere with other wi-fi technologies already in use such as wi-fi  wimax and mobile phone networks.
windows worm travels with tetris users are being warned about a windows virus that poses as the hugely popular tetris game.  the cellery worm installs a playable version of the classic falling blocks game on pcs that it has infected. while users play the game  the worm spends its time using the machine to search for new victims to infect on nearby networks. the risk of infection by cellery is thought to be very low as few copies of the worm have been found in the wild.  the cellery worm does not spread via e-mail like many other viruses. instead it browses computer networks for pcs that have not shut off all the insecure ways they connect to other machines. when it infects a machine  cellery installs a version of tetris that users can play. as the game starts up the worm also starts a music file to accompany it. at the same time the virus starts scouring networks for other vulnerable machines. the virus does no damage to machines but heavily infected networks could slow down as scanning traffic builds. productivity may suffer too if users spend time playing tetris. pcs running windows 95  98  me  nt  2000  and xp could be vulnerable to the worm.  if your company has a culture of allowing games to be played in the office  your staff may believe this is simply a new game that has been installed - rather than something that should cause concern   said graham cluley  spokesman for anti-virus firm sophos. so far the number of people infected by cellery is thought to be very small and the risks of further infection is very low. sophos urged users and companies to update their anti-virus software to keep themselves protected.
blogger grounded by her airline a us airline attendant is fighting for her job after she was suspended over postings on her blog  or online diary.  queen of the sky  otherwise known as ellen simonetti  evolved into an anonymous semi-fictional account of life in the sky. but after she posted pictures of herself in uniform  delta airlines suspended her indefinitely without pay. ms simonetti was told her suspension was a result of  inappropriate  images. delta airlines declined to comment.   i was really shocked  i had no warning   ms simonetti told bbc news online.  i never thought i would get in trouble because of the blog. i thought if they had a problem  someone would have said something before taking action.  the issue has highlighted concerns amongst the growing blogging community about conflicts of interest  employment law and free speech on personal websites. ms simonetti was suspended on 25 september pending an investigation and has since lodged a complaint with the us equal employment opportunity commission (eeoc). a spokesperson for delta airlines told bbc news online:  all i can tell you is we do not discuss internal employee issues with the media.  she added she could not say whether a similar situation over personal websites had occurred in the past.  ms simonetti started her personal blog in january to help her get over her mother s death. she had ensured she made no mention of which airline she worked for  and created fictional names for cities and companies. the airline s name was changed to anonymous airline and the city in which she was based was called quirksville. a large part of the blog contained fictional stories because queen of the sky developed over the months as a character in her own right  according to ms simonetti.  the images were taken from a digital camera she had inherited from her mother.  we often take pictures on flight or on layovers. i just though why not include them on my blog for fun.  i never meant it as something to harm my company and don t understand how they think it did harm them   ms simonetti said. she has also claimed that pictures of male delta airline employees in uniform are freely available on the web. of the 10 or so images on the site  only one showed ms simonetti s flight  wings .  they did not tell me which pictures they had a problem with. i am just assuming it was the one of me posing on seats where my skirt rode up   she said. the images were removed as soon as she learned she had been suspended. as far as ms simonetti knows  there is no company anti-blogging policy. there is guidance which suggests the company uniform cannot be used without approval from management  but use in personal pictures on websites is unclear.  jeffrey matsuura  director of the law and technology programme at the university of dayton  said personal websites can be hazardous for both employers and their employees.  there are many examples of employees who have presented some kind of material online that have gotten them in trouble with employers   he said. it was crucial that any policy about what was and what was not acceptable was expressed clearly  was reasonable  and enforced fairly in company policy.  you have to remember that as an employee  you don t have total free speech anymore   he said. mr matsuura added that some companies actively encouraged employees to blog.  one of the areas where it does become a problem is that they encourage this when it suits them  but they may not be particularly clear when they [employees] do cross the line.  he speculated that delta might be concerned that the fictional content on the blog may be linked back to the airline after the images of ms simonetti in uniform were posted.  whether or not that is successful will depend on what exactly is prohibited  and whether you can reasonably say this content now crosses that line   he said. ms simonetti said her suspension has caused two of her friends to discontinue their blogs. one of them was asked to stop blogging by his company before any action was taken.  if they had asked me just take down the blog  i would have done it  but that was not been given to me as an option   she said.  this blogging thing is obviously a new problem for employers and they need to get a policy about it. if i had known it would cost me my job  i would not have done that.
tv s future down the phone line internet tv has been talked about since the start of the web as we know it now.  but any early attempts to do it - the uk s home choice started in 1992 - were thwarted by the lack of a fast network. now that broadband networks are bedding down  and it is becoming essential for millions  the big telcos are keen to start shooting video down the line. in the face of competition from cable companies offering net voice calls  they are keen to be the top iptv dogs. software giant microsoft thinks iptv - internet protocol tv - is the future of television  and it sits neatly with its vision of the  connected entertainment experience .  telcos have been wanting to do video for a long time   ed graczyk  director of marketing for microsoft iptv  told the bbc news website.  the challenge has been the broadband network  and the state of technology up until not so long ago did not add up to a feasible solution.  compression technology was not efficient enough  the net was not good enough. a lot of stars have aligned in the last 18 months to make it a reality.   last year  he said  was all about deal making and partnering up; shaping the  iptv ecosystem . this year  those deals will start to play out and more services will come online.  2006 is where it starts ramping up and expanding to other geographies - over time as broadband becomes more prevalent in south america  and other parts of asia  it will expand   he added. what telcos really want to do is to send the  triple-play  of video  voice  and data down one single line  be it cable or dsl (digital subscriber line). some are talking about  quadruple play   too  with mobile services added into the mix. it is an emerging new breed of competition for satellite and cable broadcasters and operators. according to technology analysts  tdg research  there will be 20 million subscribers to iptv services in under six years.  key to the appeal of sending tv programmes down the same line as the web data  whenever a viewer wants it  is that it uses the same technology as the internet. it means there is not just a one-way relationship between the viewer and the  broadcaster . this allows for more dvd-like interactivity  limitless storage and broadcast space  bespoke channel  playlists   and thousands of hours of programmes or films at a viewer s fingertips. it potentially lets operators target programmes to smaller  niche or localised audiences  sending films to bollywood fans for instance  as well as individual devices.  operators could also send high-definition programmes straight to the viewer  bypassing the need for a special broadcast receiver. perhaps most compelling - yet some might say insignificant - is instantaneous channel flicking. currently  there is a delay when you try to do this on satellite  cable or freeview. with iptv  the speed is 15 milliseconds.  that gets rounds of applause   according to mr graczyk. microsoft is one of the companies that started thinking about iptv some time ago.  we believe this will be the way all tv is delivered in the future - but that is several years away   said mr graczyk.  as with music  tv has moved to digital formats.  the things software can do to integrate media into devices means a whole new generation of connected entertainment experiences that cross devices from the tv  to the mobile  to the gaming console and so on.  the company intends its microsoft s iptv edition software  an end-to-end management and delivery platform  to let telcos to do exactly that  seamlessly. it has netted seven major telcos as customers  representing a potential audience of 25 million existing broadband subscribers. its deal with us telco sbc was the largest tv software deal to date  said mr graczyk.  iptv is about more than telcos  though. there are several web-based offerings that aim to put control in the hands of the consumer by exploiting the net s power. jeremy allaire  chief of brightcove  told the bbc news website that it would be a flavour of iptv that was about harnessing the web as a  channel .   it is not just niches  but about exploiting content not usually viewed   he said.  we are focussed on the owners of video content who have rights to digitally distribute content  and who often see unencumbered distribution.  for them to do it through cable and so on is price-prohibitive   he said. this type of iptv service might also be a distribution channel for more established publishers who have unique types of content that they cannot offer through cable and satellite operators - history channel archives  for instance. what is a clear sign that iptv has a future is that microsoft is not the only player in the field. there are a lot of other  middleware  players providing similar management services as microsoft  like myrio and c-cor. but it will up to the viewer to decide if it really is to be successful.
concern over rfid tags consumers are very concerned about the use of radio frequency id (rfid) tags in shops  a survey says.  more than half of 2 000 people surveyed said they had privacy worries about the tags  which can be used to monitor stock on shelves or in warehouses. some consumer groups have expressed concern that the tags could be used to monitor shoppers once they had left shops with their purchases. the survey showed that awareness of tags among consumers in europe was low. the survey of consumers in the uk  france  germany and the netherlands was carried out by consultancy group capgemini. the firm works on behalf of more than 30 firms who are seeking to promote the growth of rfid technology. the tags are a combination of computer chip and antenna which can be read by a scanner - each item contains a unique identification number.  more than half (55%) of the respondents said they were either concerned or very concerned that rfid tags would allow businesses to track consumers via product purchases. fifty nine percent of people said they were worried that rfid tags would allow data to be used more freely by third parties. ard jan vetham  capgemini s principal consultant on rfid  said the survey showed that retailers needed to inform and educate people about rfid before it would become accepted technology.  acceptance of new technologies always has a tipping point at which consumers believe that benefits outweigh concerns.  with the right rfid approach and ongoing communication with consumers  the industry can reach this point.  he said that the survey also showed people would accept rfid if they felt that the technology could mean a reduction in car theft or faster recovery of stolen items. the tags are currently being used at one tesco distribution centre in the uk - the tags allow the rapid inventory of bulk items. they are also in use as a passcard for the m6 toll in the midlands  in the uk. mr vetham said the majority of people surveyed (52%) believed that rfid tags could be read from a distance. he said that was a misconception based on a lack of awareness of the technology. at least once consumer group - consumers against supermarket privacy invasion and numbering (caspian) - has claimed that rfid chips could be used to secretly identify people and the things they are carrying or wearing. all kinds of personal belongings  including clothes  could constantly broadcast messages about their whereabouts and their owners  it warned.
mobile gig aims to rock 3g forget about going to a crowded bar to enjoy a gig by the latest darlings of the music press.  now you could also be at a live gig on your mobile  via the latest third generation (3g) video phones. rock outfit rooster are playing what has been billed as the first ever concert broadcast by phone on tuesday evening from a london venue. the 45-minute gig is due to be  phone cast  by the 3g mobile phone operator  3. 3g technology lets people take  watch and send video clips on their phones  as well as swap data much faster than with 2g networks like gsm. people with 3g phones in the uk can already download football and music clips on their handsets.  some 1 000 fans of the london-based band will have to pay five pounds for a ticket and need a 3g handset.   once you have paid  you can come and go as much as you like  because we expect the customers to be mobile   said 3 spokesperson belinda henderson.  it s like going to a concert hall  except that you are virtually there.  the company behind the trial hopes to learn more about how people use their video phones.  we are looking on how long people will stay on average on the streams. some people may stay the whole time  some may dip in and out   said ms henderson.  we actually expect people to dip in and out because they are mobile and they will be doing other things.  3 is looking to music as a way of persuading more people to take up the latest video phones. it is already planning regular gigs throughout 2005. and during the intermission  of course  you would still be able to make a phone call.
text message record smashed uk mobile owners continue to break records with their text messaging  with latest figures showing that 26 billion texts were sent in total in 2004.  the figures collected by the mobile data association (mda) showed that 2.4 billion were fired off in december alone  the highest monthly total ever. that was 26% more than in december 2003. the records even surpassed the mda s own predictions  it said. every day 78 million messages are sent and there are no signs of a slow down. before december s bumper text record  the previous highest monthly total was in october 2004  when 2.3 billion were sent. text messaging is set to smash more records in 2005 too  said the mda  with forecasts suggesting a total of 30 billion for the year.  even though mobiles are becoming increasingly sophisticated with much more multimedia applications  texting is still one of the most useful functions of mobiles. people are using sms to do much more too. booking cinema tickets  text voting  and news or sports text alerts are growing popular. mobile owners have also given the chance to donate to the disasters emergency committee s (dec) asian tsunami fund by texting  donate  to a simple short code number. looking further ahead in the year  the mda s chairman mike short  has predicted that more people will go online through their mobiles  estimating 15 billion wap page impressions. handsets with gprs capability - an  always on  net connection - will rise to 75%  while 3g mobile ownership growing to five million by the end of 2005. these third generation mobiles offer a high-speed connection which means more data like video can be received on the phone. globally  mobile phone sales passed 167 million in the third quarter of 2004  according to a recent report from analysts gartner. that was 26% more than the previous year. it is predicted that there would be two billion handsets in use worldwide by the end of 2005.
microsoft seeking spyware trojan microsoft is investigating a trojan program that attempts to switch off the firm s anti-spyware software.  the spyware tool was only released by microsoft in the last few weeks and has been downloaded by six million people. stephen toulouse  a security manager at microsoft  said the malicious program was called bankash-a trojan and was being sent as an e-mail attachment. microsoft said it did not believe the program was widespread and recommended users to use an anti-virus program. the program attempts to disable or delete microsoft s anti-spyware tool and suppress warning messages given to users.  it may also try to steal online banking passwords or other personal information by tracking users  keystrokes.  microsoft said in a statement it is investigating what it called a criminal attack on its software. earlier this week  microsoft said it would buy anti-virus software maker sybari software to improve its security in its windows and e-mail software. microsoft has said it plans to offer its own paid-for anti-virus software but it has not yet set a date for its release. the anti-spyware program being targeted is currently only in beta form and aims to help users find and remove spyware - programs which monitor internet use  causes advert pop-ups and slow a pc s performance.
us duo in first spam conviction a brother and sister in the us have been convicted of sending hundreds of thousands of unsolicited e-mail messages to aol subscribers.  it is the first criminal prosecution of internet spam distributors. jurors in virginia recommended that the man  jeremy jaynes  serve nine years in prison and that his sister  jessica degroot  be fined $7 500. they were convicted under a state law that bars the sending of bulk e-mails using fake addresses.  they will be formally sentenced next year. a third defendant  richard rutkowski  was acquitted. prosecutors said jaynes was  a snake oil salesman in a new format   using the internet to peddle useless wares  news agency associated press reported. a  fed-ex refund processor  was supposed to allow people to earn $75 an hour working from home. another item on sale was an  internet history eraser . his sister helped him process credit card payments. jaynes amassed a fortune of $24m from his sales  prosecutors said.  he s been successful ripping people off all these years   ap quoted prosecutor russell mcguire as saying. jaynes was also found guilty of breaking a state law which prohibits the sending of more than 100 000 e-mails in 30 days  virginia state attorney general jerry kilgore reportedly said. prosecutors had asked for 15 years in jail for jaynes  and a jail term for his sister. but jaynes  lawyer david oblon called the nine-year recommended term  outrageous  and said his client believed he was innocent. he pointed out that all three of the accused lived in north carolina and were unaware of the virginia state law. spam messages are estimated to account for at least 60% of all e-mails sent.
microsoft releases bumper patches microsoft has warned pc users to update their systems with the latest security fixes for flaws in windows programs.  in its monthly security bulletin  it flagged up eight  critical  security holes which could leave pcs open to attack if left unpatched. the number of holes considered  critical  is more than usual. they affect windows programs  including internet explorer (ie)  media player and instant messaging. four other important fixes were also released. these were considered to be less critical  however. if not updated  either automatically or manually  pc users running the programs could be vulnerable to viruses or other malicious attacks designed to exploit the holes. many of the flaws could be used by virus writers to take over computers remotely  install programs  change  and delete or see data.  one of the critical patches microsoft has made available is an important one that fixes some ie flaws. stephen toulouse  a microsoft security manager  said the flaws were known about  and although the firm had not seen any attacks exploiting the flaw  he did not rule them out. often  when a critical flaw is announced  spates of viruses follow because home users and businesses leave the flaw unpatched. a further patch fixes a hole in media player  windows messenger and msn messenger which an attacker could use to take control of unprotected machines through .png files. microsoft announces any vulnerabilities in its software every month. the most important ones are those which are classed as  critical . its latest releases came the week that the company announced it was to buy security software maker sybari software as part of microsoft s plans to make its own security programs.
warning over tsunami aid website net users are being told to avoid a scam website that claims to collect cash on behalf of tsunami victims.  the site looks plausible because it uses an old version of the official disasters emergency committee webpage. however  dec has no connection with the fake site and says it has contacted the police about it. the site is just the latest in a long list of scams that try to cash in on the goodwill generated by the tsunami disaster.  the link to the website is contained in a spam e-mail that is currently circulating. the message s subject line reads  urgent tsunami earthquake appeal  and its text bears all the poor grammar and bad spelling that characterises many other phishing attempts. the web address of the fake site is decuk.org which could be close enough to the official www.dec.org.uk address to confuse some people keen to donate. patricia sanders  spokeswoman for the disaster emergency committee said it was aware of the site and had contacted the computer crime unit at scotland yard to help get it shut down. she said the spam e-mails directing people to the site started circulating two days ago shortly after the domain name of the site was registered. it is thought that the fake site is being run from romania. ms sanders said dec had contacted us net registrars who handle domain ownership and the net hosting firm that is keeping the site on the web.  dec was going to push for all cash donated via the site to be handed over to the official organisation. bt and dec s hosting company were also making efforts to get the site shut down  she said.  ms sanders said sending out spam e-mail to solicit donations was not dec s style and that it would never canvass support in this way. she said that dec hoped to get the fake site shut down as soon as possible. all attempts by the bbc news website to contact the people behind the site have failed. none of the e-mail addresses supplied on the site work and the real owner of the domain is obscured in publicly available net records. this is not the first attempt to cash in on the outpouring of goodwill that has accompanied appeals for tsunami aid. one e-mail sent out in early january came from someone who claimed that he had lost his parents in the disaster and was asking for help moving an inheritance from a bank account in the netherlands. the con was very similar to the familiar nigerian forward fee fraud e-mails that milk money out of people by promising them a cut of a much larger cash pile. other scam e-mails included a link to a website that supposedly let people donate money but instead loaded spyware on their computers that grabbed confidential information. in a monthly report anti-virus firm sophos said that two e-mail messages about the tsunami made it to the top 10 hoax list during january. another tsunami-related e-mail is also circulating that carries the zar worm which tries to spread via the familiar route of microsoft s outlook e-mail program. anyone opening the attachment of the mail will have their contact list plundered by the worm keen to find new addresses to send itself to.
text message record smashed again uk mobile owners continue to break records with their text messaging  with latest figures showing that 26 billion texts were sent in total in 2004.  the figures collected by the mobile data association (mda) showed that 2.4 billion were fired off in december alone  the highest monthly total ever. that was 26% more than in december 2003. the records even surpassed the mda s own predictions  it said. every day 78 million messages are sent and there are no signs of a slow down. before december s bumper text record  the previous highest monthly total was in october 2004  when 2.3 billion were sent. text messaging is set to smash more records in 2005 too  said the mda  with forecasts suggesting a total of 30 billion for the year.  even though mobiles are becoming increasingly sophisticated with much more multimedia applications  texting is still one of the most useful functions of mobiles. people are using sms to do much more too. booking cinema tickets  text voting  and news or sports text alerts are growing popular. mobile owners have also given the chance to donate to the disasters emergency committee s (dec) asian tsunami fund by texting  donate  to a simple short code number. looking further ahead in the year  the mda s chairman mike short  has predicted that more people will go online through their mobiles  estimating 15 billion wap page impressions. handsets with gprs capability - an  always on  net connection - will rise to 75%  while 3g mobile ownership growing to five million by the end of 2005. these third generation mobiles offer a high-speed connection which means more data like video can be received on the phone. globally  mobile phone sales passed 167 million in the third quarter of 2004  according to a recent report from analysts gartner. that was 26% more than the previous year. it is predicted that there would be two billion handsets in use worldwide by the end of 2005.
blogs take on the mainstream web logs or blogs are everywhere  with at least an estimated five million on the web and that number is set to grow.  these online diaries come in many shapes and styles  ranging from people willing to sharing their views  pictures and links  to companies interested in another way of reaching their customers. but this year the focus has been on blogs which cast a critical eye over news events  often writing about issues ignored by the big media or offering an eye-witness account of events. most blogs may have only a small readership  but communication experts say they have provided an avenue for people to have a say in the world of politics. the most well-known examples include iraqi salam pax s accounts of the us-led war  former iranian vice-president mohammad ali abtahi exclusive insight into the islamic republic s government  and the highs and lows of the recent us election campaign. there are already websites pulling together these first-hand reporting accounts heralded by blogs  like wikinews.com  launched last november.  the blogging movement has been building up for many years.  andrew nachison  director of the media center  a us-based think-tank that studies media  technology and society  highlights the us presidential race as a possible turning point for blogs.  you could look at that as a moment when audiences exercised a new form of power  to choose among many more sources of information than they have never had before   he says.  and blogs were a key part of that transformation.  among them were blogs carrying picture messages  saying  we are sorry  for george w bush s victory and the responses from his supporters. mr nachison argues blogs have become independent sources for images and ideas that circumvent traditional sources of news and information such as newspapers  tv and radio.  we have to acknowledge that in all of these cases  mainstream media actually plays a role in the discussion and the distribution of these ideas   he told the bbc news website.  but they followed the story  they didn t lead it.   some parts of the so-called traditional media have expressed concerns about this emerging competitor  raising questions about the journalistic value of blogs.  others  like the french newspaper le monde  have applied a different strategy  offering blogs as part of its content.  i don t think the mission and role of journalism is threatened. it is in transition  as society itself is in transition   says mr nachison. however  he agrees with other experts like the linguist and political analyst noam chomsky  that mainstream media has lost the traditional role of news gatekeeper.  the one-to-many road of traditional journalism  yes  it is threatened. and professional journalists need to acclimate themselves to an environment in which there are many more contributors to the discourse   says mr nachison.  the notion of a gatekeeper who filters and decides what s acceptable for public consumption and what isn t  that s gone forever.   with people now walking around with information devices in their pockets  like camera or video phones  we are going to see more instances of ordinary citizens breaking stories.   it seems unlikely that we will end up living in a planet where every human is a blogger.  but the current number of blogs is likely to keep on growing  in a web already overloaded with information. blog analysis firm technorati estimates the number of blogs in existence  the so-called blogosphere  has already exceeded five million  and is growing at exponential levels. tools such as google s blogger  movabletype and the recently launched beta version of msn spaces are making it easier to run a blog. us research think-tank pew internet & american life says a blog is created every 5.8 seconds  although less than 40% of the total are updated at least once every two months. but experts agree that the phenomenon  allowing individuals to publish  share ideas  exchange information  comment on current issues  post images or video on the web easily  is here to stay.  we are entering one era in which the technological infrastructure is creating a different context for how we tell our stories and how we communicate with each other   said mr nachison.  and there s going to be bad that comes with the good.
blind student  hears in colour  a blind student has developed software that turns colours into musical notes so that he can read weather maps.  victor wong  a graduate student from hong kong studying at cornell university in new york state  had to read coloured maps of the upper atmosphere as part of his research. to study  space weather  mr wong needed to explore minute fluctuations in order to create mathematical models. a number of solutions were tried  including having a colleague describe the maps and attempting to print them in braille. mr wong eventually hit upon the idea of translating individual colours into music  and enlisted the help of a computer graphics specialist and another student to do the programming work.   the images have three dimensions and i had to find a way of reading them myself   mr wong told the bbc news website.  for the sake of my own study - and for the sake of blind scientists generally - i felt it would be good to develop software that could help us to read colour images.  he tried a prototype version of the software to explore a photograph of a parrot. in order to have an exact reference to the screen  a pen and tablet device is used. the software then assigns one of 88 piano notes to individually coloured pixels - ranging from blue at the lower end of this scale to red at the upper end. mr wong says the application is still very much in its infancy and is only useful for reading images that have been created digitally.  if i took a random picture and scanned it and then used my software to recognise it  it wouldn t work that well.   mr wong has been blind from the age of seven and he thinks that having a  colour memory  makes the software more useful than it would be to a scientist who had never had any vision.  as the notes increase in pitch i know the colour s getting redder and redder  and in my mind s eye a patch of red appears.  the colour to music software has not yet been made available commercially  and mr wong believes that several people would have to work together to make it viable. but he hopes that one day it can be developed to give blind people access to photographs and other images.
google launches tv search service the net search giant google has launched a search service that lets people look for tv programmes.  the service  google video beta  searches closed caption information that comes with programmes. it only searches us channel content currently. results list programmes with still images and text from the point where the search phrase was spoken. it should expand over time to include content from more channels  said a google spokesperson. the first version of the service is part of google s expanding efforts to be a ubiquitous search engine for people to find what they want on the web and beyond.  we think tv is a big part of people s lives   said jonathan rosenberg  google s vice president of product management.  ultimately  we would like to have all tv programming indexed.   google video has been indexing us-based programmes from pbs  the nba  fox news  and c-span since december. but there were few clues from google about when more global broadcasters would be included.  over time  we plan to increase the number of television channels and video content available via google video but don t have more product details to share with you today   a google spokesperson told the bbc news website.  the results thrown up by the search will also include programme and episode information like channel  date and time. it also lets people find the next time and channel where a programme will aired locally using a us zip code search function. rival search engine yahoo has been developing a similar type of video search for webcasts and tv clips which it promotes from its homepage. it offers direct links to websites with movies or other clips relevant to the search query  but does not pinpoint when the search query occurred. a spokeswoman told the financial times on monday that yahoo was adding captioning for bloomberg  bbc and bskyb broadcasts. a smaller service  blinkx.tv  was launched last month. it searches for and links to tv news  film trailers  and other video and audio clips.
finding new homes for old phones re-using old mobile phones is not just good for the environment  it has social benefits too.  research has found that in some developing nations old mobile phones can help close the digital divide. the forum for the future research found that the low cost of these recycled handsets means they can have a very useful second life in poorer nations. but the forum found that more needed to be done to collect old phones rather than let them rot in landfill sites.  the report reveals that approximately 15 million mobile phones go out of use every year in the uk. of the 15 million that are swapped for newer models each year  only 25% get returned to mobile phone firms for recycling or re-use. the slowly growing mass of unrecycled  discarded phones has now reached 90 million handsets  the equivalent of 9 000 tonnes of waste  estimates james goodman  report author and a senior adviser at the forum for the future.  it s quite common for people to have two or three phones just lying around   said mr goodman.  many of these older phones could end up in landfill sites leaking the potentially toxic materials they are made of into the wider world  said mr goodman. far better  he said  to hand the phone back to an operator who can send it overseas where it can enjoy a second lease of life.  we ve heard the environmental argument for handing a phone back   said mr goodman   but there s a strong social argument too.  older mobile phones are proving particularly useful in poorer nations where people want to use a mobile and keep in touch with friends and family but do not have the income to buy the most up to date model. the forum for the future report took an in-depth look at romania where reconditioned mobile phones were proving very popular.  it s an interesting country because it has a really crap fixed line network   said mr goodman   and there s a real desire for people to get mobile phones.  but the relatively low wages in romania  which is one of the poorest countries in europe  mean few people can afford a shiny new phone.  the affordability of the handsets is a real barrier to getting one   he said. reconditioned handsets have boosted take-up of mobiles as the report revealed that almost one-third of romanian pre-pay mobile phone users were using reconditioned handsets. the re-used handsets tend to be about one-third of the price of a new handset. georgeta minciu  a romanian part-time cleaner  said:  normally a mobile phone would not be possible on my wages. i am a single parent - keeping in touch with my daughter is important to me.   this is the only way i can afford to have a phone   she said. mr goodman said phone operators and consumers needed to do more to ensure that more of britain s mobile mountain made it overseas. but  he added  those keen to use a mobile will not accept any old handset.  if its more than a few years old people are not going to want it   he said.
mac mini heralds mini revolution the mac mini was launched amid much fanfare by apple and great excitement by apple watchers last month. but does the latest macintosh justify the hype  let us get a few things dealt with at the outset - yes  the mac mini is really  really small  and yes  it is another piece of inspired apple design. there is more to be said on the computer s size and design but it is worth highlighting that the mac mini is a just a computer. inside that small box there is a g4 processor  a cd/dvd player  a hard drive  some other technical bits and bobs and an operating system. a dvd burner  wireless and bluetooth technologies can be bought at extra cost. and if you do not have a monitor  keyboard or mouse then you will need to purchase those also.  it is not the fastest computer for the money but for under £400 you are getting something more interesting than mere technical specifications - apple software. the mac mini comes bundled with mac os x  the operating system  as well as ilife 05  a suite of software which includes itunes  web browser safari  iphoto  garage band and idvd. i doubt many pc lovers would seriously argue that windows xp comes with a better suite of programs than mac os x.  of course  users of open source operating system linux draw up their own menu of programs. for people who want to do interesting things with their music  photos and home movies then a mac mini is an ideal first computer or companion to a main computer.  it s a good little machine with a reasonable amount of power and just perfect for the average computer user who wants to leave the tyranny of window and viruses   said mark sparrow  technical and reviews editor at mac format magazine. he added:  in essence  it s a laptop in a biscuit tin  minus the screen and the keyboard.  the software bundle that comes with the mini makes your average budget pc look a bit sick.  the relatively low price of the machine has also encouraged the more technically-savvy to experiment with their macs. one user has already created a  dock  to enable him to plug in and out his mac mini in his car.  the small size of the machine makes it a practical solution for in-car entertainment - playing movies and music - as well as navigation. another user has mounted his mac mini to the back of his large plasma screen and then controls the computer via a wireless keyboard and mouse. when it was first announced some pundits thought the mini was designed as a sort of stealth media centre - ie the machine would be used to serve tv programmes  music  films and photos - partly due to its small  living room friendly design. but there are obvious reasons why this is not the case - at least not in the here and now the hard drive - at 80gb for the larger model - is too small to be realistically used as media centre.  while commercial personal video recorders are on the market with smaller than 80gb hard drives it is worth remembering that they only store tv content. a media centre computer has to store music  files and photos and as such 80gb just seems too small. most pcs running windows media center have at least 120gb hard disks. coupled with the lack of a tv tuner card  a digital audio out and any kind of media centre software bundled with the machine then the mac mini should be judged on what it is  not what it is not. but that has not stopped more enterprising users from adapting the mac mini to media centre uses. so - is the mac mini just another computer or a revolution in computing  graham barlow  editor of mac format  understandably has a rather partisan viewpoint.  it s just a mac  but we should be very excited - it s revolutionary in its size (smaller than pcs)  looks (looks better than pcs)  and the fact that it s the first mac designed to really go for the low-cost pc market.  the design of the mac mini is further evidence of a future when pcs are more than just bland  bulky boxes. there are a number of companies who already produce miniature pcs based on mini-itx motherboards. but at the moment these pcs tend to be either for the home-build enthusiast or expensive pre-built options based around microsoft s media center software. but for the value the mac mini offers  bringing some of the best software packages within reach of more consumers than ever before  apple is to be congratulated. let us say then that if the mac mini is not a fully fledged revolution - it is a mini revolution.
gadget show heralds mp3 christmas partners of those who love their hi-tech gear may want to get their presents in early as experts predict a gadget shortage this christmas.  with apple s ipod topping wish lists again  there may not be enough ipod minis to go round  predicts oliver irish  editor of gadget magazine stuff.  the ipod mini is likely to be this year s tracey island   said mr irish. stuff has compiled a list of the top 10 gadgets for 2004 and the ipod is at number one.  for anyone bewildered by the choice of gadgets on the market  stuff and what hi-fi  are hosting a best-of gadget show in london this weekend. star of the show will be sony s qrio robot  an all-singing  all-dancing  football-playing man-machine who can even hold intelligent conversations.  but he is not for sale and sony has no commercial plans for the robot.  he will greet visitors and is flying in from japan. he probably has his own airplane seat  that is how highly sony prize him   said mr irish. also on display will be a virtual keyboard which projects itself onto any flat surface. the event will play host to a large collection of digital music players  from companies such as creative  sony and philips as well as the ubiquitously fashionable ipod from apple. suggestions that it could be a gaming or wireless christmas are unlikely to come true as mp3 players remain the most popular stocking filler  said mr irish.  demand is huge and apple has promised that it can supply enough but people might struggle to get their hands on ipod minis   said mr irish.  for those who like their gadgets to be multi-talented  the gizmondo  a powerful gaming console with gps and gprs  that also doubles up as an mp3 player  movie player and camera  could be a must-have.  what is impressive is how much it can do and how well it can do them   said mr irish. this christmas  gadgets will not be an all-male preserve.  women will be getting gadgets from husbands and boyfriends as well as buying them for themselves   said mr irish.  gadgets nowadays are lifestyle products rather than just for geeks.
fast lifts rise into record books two high-speed lifts at the world s tallest building have been officially recognised as the planet s fastest.  the lifts take only 30 seconds to whisk passengers to the top of the 508m tall tfc 101 tower in taipei  taiwan. the guinness book of records has declared the 17m per second speed of the two lifts the swiftest on earth. the lifts also have a pressure control system to stop passengers  ears popping as they ascend and descend at high speed.  in total  the tfc tower has 61 lifts  34 of them double-deckers  and 50 escalators to shuttle people around its 106 floors. the tfc 101 tower is due to be officially opened on 31 december.  the super-fast lifts can speed up to 24 passengers to the tip of the tower in about 30 seconds  while ascending their 382m track. the 17m/s top speed of the lifts translates to about 38mph (61km/h). curiously the lifts take longer to descend and spend almost a whole minute returning to ground level from the top of the tfc tower. the key new technologies applied in the world s fastest elevators include:    - a pressure control system  which adjusts the atmospheric pressure inside a car by using suction and discharge blowers  preventing  ear popping    - an active control system which tries to balance the lift more finely and remove the sources of vibrations   - streamlined cars to reduce the whistling noise produced by running the lifts at a high speed inside a narrow shaft      the certification of our elevators as world record-holders by the authoritative guinness world records is a great honour for us   said masayuki shimono  president of manufacturer toshiba elevator and building systems which installed the lifts. the first record for the world s fastest passenger elevators was published in the first edition of the guinness book of records in 1955.  as such  it is an interesting indicator of how technology has advanced in the 50 years since that first edition  when the record was 426m per minute  or 25.6 km/h  less than half the speed of the new record   said hein le roux  specialist researcher at the guinness world records. taipei s tfc 101 tower is more than 50m taller than the petronas towers in kuala lumpur  malaysia - formerly the world s tallest skyscraper.
mobiles  not media players yet  mobiles are not yet ready to be all-singing  all-dancing multimedia devices which will replace portable media players  say two reports.  despite moves to bring music download services to mobiles  people do not want to trade multimedia services with size and battery life  said jupiter. a separate study by gartner has also said real-time tv broadcasts to mobiles is  unlikely  in europe until 2007. technical issues and standards must be resolved first  said the report. batteries already have to cope with other services that operators offer  like video playback  video messaging  megapixel cameras and games amongst others. bringing music download services based on the success of computer-based download services will put more demands on battery life.  fifty percent of europeans said the size of a mobile was the most important factor when it came to choosing their phone  but more power demands tend to mean larger handsets.  mobile phone music services must not be positioned to compete with the pc music experience as the handsets are not yet ready   said thomas husson  mobile analyst at jupiter research.  mobile music services should be new and different  and enable operators to differentiate their brands and support third generation network launches.  other problems facing mobile music include limited storage on phones  compared to portable players which can hold up to 40gb of music. the mobile industry is keen to get into music downloading  after the success of apple s itunes  napster and other net music download services.  with phones getting smarter and more powerful  there are also demands to be able to watch tv on the move. in the us  services like tivo to go let people transfer pre-recorded tv content onto their phones. but  the gartner report on mobile tv broadcasting in europe suggests direct broadcasting will have to wait. currently  tv-like services  where clips are downloaded  are offered by several european operators  like italy s tim and 3. mobile tv will have to overcome several barriers before it is widely taken up though  said the report.  various standards and ways of getting tv signals to mobiles are being worked on globally. in europe  trials in berlin and helsinki are making use of terrestrial tv masts to broadcast compressed signals to handsets with extra receivers. a service from the norwegian broadcasting corporation lets people watch tv programmes on their mobiles 24 hours a day. the service uses 3gp technology  one of the standards for mobile tv. but at the end of 2004  the european telecommunications institute (etsi) formally adopted digital video broadcasting handheld (dvb-h) as the mobile tv broadcasting standard for europe. operators will be working on the standard as a way to bring real-time broadcasts to mobiles  as well as trying to overcome several other barriers. the cost and infrastructure needs to set up the services will need to be addressed. handsets also need to be able to work with the dvb-h standard. tv services will have to live up to the expectations of the digital tv generation too  which expects good quality images at low prices  according to analysts. people are also likely to be put off watching tv on such small screens  said gartner. digital video recorders  like europe s sky+ box  and video-on-demand services mean people have much more control over what tv they watch. as a result  people may see broadcasting straight to mobiles as taking away that control. more powerful smartphones like the xda ii  nokia 6600  sonyericsson p900 and the orange e200  offering web access  text and multimedia messaging  e-mail  calendar and gaming are becoming increasingly common. a report by analysts instat/mdr has predicted that smartphone shipments will grow by 44% over the next five years. it says that smartphones will make up 117 million out of 833 million handsets shipped globally by 2009.
halo fans  hope for sequel xbox video game halo 2 has been released in the us on 9 november  with a uk release two days later. why is the game among the most anticipated of all time   halo is considered by many video game pundits to be one of the finest examples of interactive entertainment ever produced and more than 1.5 million people worldwide have pre-ordered the sequel. a science fiction epic  halo centred the action on a human cyborg  controlled by the player  who had to save his crew from an alien horde after a crash landing on a strange and exotic world contained on the interior surface of a giant ring in space. remembrance of things past it was not - but as a slice of schlock science fiction inspired by works such as larry niven s ringworld and the film starship troopers  it fit the bill perfectly. halo stood out from a crowd of similar titles - it was graphically impressive  had tremendous audio  using dolby digital  a decent storyline  instant playability and impressive physics.  but what marked halo as a classic were the thousands of details which brought a feeling of polish and the enormously-high production values not usually associated with video gaming.  produced by bungie software  renowned for their innovation in gaming  it caused a stir among the gaming fraternity when the developer was bought by microsoft and became an xbox exclusive. claude errera  editor of fansite halo.bungie.org  said:  bungie got everything right. they were really careful to make sure everything worked the way it was supposed to.  nothing distracts you when you were playing. there was nothing in halo that had not been done before but everything in there was as good as it could be.  he added:  graphically it was superior to everything else out there.   it also had a depth to it that made it stand out.  halo was unusually immersive  sucking the player into the action and blurring the interface between screen and controller. it also capitalised on the growing popularity of lan gaming in the pc world - for the first time it became easy to link multiple game consoles together  allowing up to 16 players to battle against each other at the same time.  the game instantly cultivated an online following  which continues today with a score of halo fan websites following every aspect of the sequel  halo 2. errera spends three to fours hours a day of his own time maintaining the hugely popular website  which attracts 600 000 page views a day from halo fans eager for the latest news.  when the xbox launched on november 15 2001 in the us  halo was one of the launch titles and had an immediate impact on critics and consumers.  halo is the most important launch game for any console ever   wrote the influential edge magazine in its review  giving it a rare 10 out of 10 mark. the game had its critics and while it is not a one-off original as a game  it brought many original touches and flourishes to the genre which have defined all other first person shooters since.  the first time i played it i just stood there watching the spent shells fall out of my gun   said errera  remarking on the level of detail in the game.  the game also inspired thousands of people to write their own fiction based on the storyline and produce downloadable video clips of the many weird and wonderful things that can be done in the game.  it blew me away the first time someone managed to climb to the top of halo   said errera  referring to a fan who had created a video of master chief scaling the landscape of the graphical world. video clips of the more outrageous stunts that are possible thanks to the game s amazing physics engine are incredibly popular and some have attained a cult following. speculation about the sequel has seen every titbit analysed and poured over with all the intent of a forensic scientist examining a body. when early screenshots of the game were released some people wrote essay-length articles highlighting everything from the texture of graphics to clues about the story line. errera said expectations of the sequel among fans were sky high.  it does not feel like a game release any more. somebody told me this was the biggest single release of any product in microsoft s history.  we re all just hoping that bungie has got it right again.   halo 2 is out on 9 november in the us and 11 november in the uk
internet boom for gift shopping cyberspace is becoming a very popular destination for christmas shoppers.  forecasts predict that british people will spend £4bn buying gifts online during the festive season  an increase of 64% on 2003. surveys also show that the average amount that people are spending is rising  as is the range of goods that they are happy to buy online. savvy shoppers are also using the net to find the hot presents that are all but sold out in high street stores.  almost half of the uk population now shop online according to figures collected by the interactive media in retail group which represents web retailers. about 85% of this group  18m people  expect to do a lot of their christmas gift buying online this year  reports the industry group. on average each shopper will spend £220 and britons lead europe in their affection for online shopping.  almost a third of all the money spent online this christmas will come out of british wallets and purses compared to 29% from german shoppers and only 4% from italian gift buyers. james roper  director of the imrg  said shoppers were now much happier to buy so-called big ticket items such as lcd television sets and digital cameras. mr roper added that many retailers were working hard to reassure consumers that online shopping was safe and that goods ordered as presents would arrive in time for christmas. he advised consumers to give shops a little more time than usual to fulfil orders given that online buying is proving so popular. a survey by hostway suggests that many men prefer to shop online to avoid the embarrassment of buying some types of presents  such as lingerie  for wives and girlfriends. much of this online shopping is likely to be done during work time  according to research carried out by security firm saint bernard software. the research reveals that up to two working days will be lost by staff who do their shopping via their work computer. worst offenders will be those in the 18-35 age bracket  suggests the research  who will spend up to five hours per week in december browsing and buying at online shops.  iggy fanlo  chief revenue officer at shopping.com  said that the growing numbers of people using broadband was driving interest in online shopping.  when you consider narrowband and broadband the conversion to sale is two times higher   he said. higher speeds meant that everything happened much faster  he said  which let people spend time browsing and finding out about products before they buy.  the behaviour of online shoppers was also changing  he said.  the single biggest reason people went online before this year was price   he said.  the number one reason now is convenience.   very few consumers click on the lowest price   he said.  they are looking for good prices and merchant reliability.  consumer comments and reviews were also proving popular with shoppers keen to find out who had the most reliable customer service. data collected by ebay suggests that some smart shoppers are getting round the shortages of hot presents by buying them direct through the auction site. according to ebay uk there are now more than 150 robosapiens remote control robots for sale via the site. the robosapiens toy is almost impossible to find in online and offline stores. similarly many shoppers are turning to ebay to help them get hold of the hard-to-find slimline playstation 2  which many retailers are only selling as part of an expensive bundle. the high demand for the playstation 2 has meant that prices for it are being driven up. in shops the ps2 is supposed to sell for £104.99. in some ebay uk auctions the price has risen to more than double this figure. many people are also using ebay to get hold of gadgets not even released in this country. the portable version of the playstation has only just gone on sale in japan yet some enterprising ebay users are selling the device to uk gadget fans.
hotspot users gain free net calls people using wireless net hotspots will soon be able to make free phone calls as well as surf the net.  wireless provider broadreach and net telephony firm skype are rolling out a service at 350 hotspots around the uk this week. users will need a skype account - downloadable for free - and they will then be able to make net calls via wi-fi without paying for net access. skype allows people to make free pc-based calls to other skype users.  users of the system can also make calls to landlines and mobiles for a fee. the system is gaining in popularity and now has 28 million users around the world. its paid service - dubbed skype out - has so far attracted 940 000 users. it plans to add more paid services with forthcoming launches of video conferencing  voice mail and skype in  a service which would allow users to receive phone calls from landlines and mobiles. london-based software developer connectotel has unveiled software that will expand the sms functions of skype  allowing users to send text messages to mobile phones from the service. broadreach networks has around two million users and hotspots in places such as virgin megastores  the travelodge chain of hotels and all london s major rail terminals. the company is due to launch wi-fi on virgin trains later in the year.  skype s success at spreading the world about internet telephony is well-known and we are delighted to be offering free access to skype users in our hotspots   commented broadreach chief executive magnus mcewen-king.
warning over windows word files writing a microsoft word document can be a dangerous business  according to document security firm workshare.  up to 75% of all business documents contained sensitive information most firms would not want exposed  a survey by the firm revealed. to make matters worse 90% of those companies questioned had no idea that confidential information was leaking. the report warns firms to do a better job of policing documents as corporate compliance becomes more binding.  sensitive information inadvertently leaked in documents includes confidential contractual terms  competitive information that rivals would be keen to see and special deals for key customers  said andrew pearson  european boss of workshare which commissioned the research.  the efficiencies the internet has brought in such as instant access to information have also created security and control issues too   he said. the problem is particularly acute with documents prepared using microsoft word because of the way it maintains hidden records about editing changes. as documents get passed around  worked on and amended by different staff members the sensitive information finds its way into documents. poor control over the editing and amending process can mean that information that should be expunged survives final edits. microsoft  however  does provide an add-on tool for windows pcs that fixes the problem.  the remove hidden data add-in is a tool that you can use to remove personal or hidden data that might not be immediately apparent when you view the document in your microsoft office application   says the instructions on microsoft s website. microsoft recommends that the tool is used before people publish any word document. a tool for apple machines running word is not available. workshare surveyed firms around the world and found that  on average  31% of documents contained legally sensitive information but in many firms up to three-quarters fell in to the high risk category. often  said mr pearson  this sensitive information was invisible because it got deleted and changed as different drafts were prepared.  however  the way that windows works means that earlier versions can be recalled and reconstructed by those keen to see how a document has evolved. few firms have any knowledge of the existence of this so-called metadata about the changes that a document has gone through or that it can be reconstructed. the discovery of this hidden information could prove embarrassing for companies if  for instance  those tendering for contracts found out about the changes to terms of a deal being negotiated. the research revealed that a document s metadata could be substantial as  on average  only 40% of contributors  changes to a document make it to the final draft. problems with documents could mean trouble for firms as regulatory bodies step up scrutiny and compliance laws start to bite  said mr pearson.
gadget growth fuels eco concerns technology firms and gadget lovers are being urged to think more about the environment when buying and disposing of the latest hi-tech products.  at the consumer electronics show in las vegas earlier this month  several hi-tech firms were recognised for their strategies to help the environment. ebay also announced the rethink project bringing together intel  apple  and ibm among others to promote recycling. the us consumer electronics market is set to grow by over 11% in 2005. but more awareness is needed about how and where old gadgets can be recycled as well as how to be more energy efficient  said the us environmental protection agency (epa). of particular growing concern is how much energy it takes to recharge portable devices  one of the fastest growing markets in technology. the consumer electronics association (cea) has predicted that shipments of consumer technologies in 2005 will reach more than $125.73 billion (nearly £68 billion).  ebay s initiative pulls together major technology firms  environment groups  government agencies and ebay users to give information about what to do with old computers and where to send them. the online auction house thinks that its already-established community of loyal users could be influential.  we really became aware of the e-waste issue and we saw that our 125 million users can be a powerful force for good   ebay s david stern told the bbc news website.   we saw the opportunity to meet the additional demand we have on the site for used computers and saw the opportunity too to good some good for the environment.  but it is not just computers that cause a problem for the environment. teenagers get a new mobile every 11 months  adults every 18 months and a 15 million handsets are replaced in total each year. yet  only 15% are actually recycled. this year  a predicted two billion people worldwide will own a mobile  according to a deloitte report. schemes in the us  like ripmobile  could help in targeting younger generations with recycling messages. the initiative  which was also launched at ces  rewards 10 to 28-year-olds for returning unused phones.  this system allows for the transformation of a drawer full of unused mobile phones into anything from music to clothes to electronics or games   said seth heine from ripmobile.  one group of students collected 1 000 mobiles for recycling in just three months. mr heine told the bbc news website that what was important was to raise awareness amongst the young so that recycling becomes  learned behaviour . europe is undoubtedly more advanced than the us in terms of recycling awareness and robust  end of life  programmes  although there is a tide change happening in the rest of the world too. intel showcased some its motherboards and chips at ces which are entirely lead free.   there is more and more awareness on the consumer side  but the whole industry is moving towards being lead free   intel s allen wilson told the bbc news website.  there is still low-level awareness right now  but it is on the rise - the highest level of awareness is in europe.  a european union (eu) directive  weee (waste electronic and electrical equipment)  comes into effect in august. it puts the responsibility on electrical manufacturers to recycle items that are returned to them. but developments are also being made to design better technologies which are more energy efficient and which do not contain harmful substances. elements like chromium  lead  and cadmium - common in consumer electronics goods - will be prohibited in all products in the eu by 2006.  but it is not just about recycling either. the predicted huge growth in the gadget market means the amount of energy used to power them up is on the rise too. the biggest culprit  according to the epa  is the innocuous power adaptor  nicknamed  energy vampires . they provide vital juice for billions of mobile phones  pdas (personal digital assistants)  digital cameras  camcorders  and digital music players.  although there is a focus on developing efficient and improved circuits in the devices themselves  the technologies inside rechargers are still outdated and so eat up more energy than is needed to power a gadget. on 1 january  new efficiency standards for external power supplies came into effect as part of the european commission code of conduct. but at ces  the epa also unveiled new guidelines for its latest energy star initiative which targets external power adapters. these map out the framework for developing better adaptors that can be labelled with an energy star logo  meaning they are about 35% more efficient. the initiative is a global effort and more manufacturers  adaptors are being brought on board. most are made in china. about two billion are shipped global every year  and about three billion are in use in the us alone. the epa is already working with several companies which make more than 22% of power supplies on the market.  we are increasingly finding companies that not only want to provide neat  hi-tech devices  but also bundle with it a hi-tech  efficient power supply   the epa s andrew fanara said. initiatives like this are critical; if power adaptors continue to be made and used as they are now  consumer electronics and other small appliances will be responsible for more than 40% of electricity used in us homes  said the epa.
software watching while you work software that can not only monitor every keystroke and action performed at a pc but also be used as legally binding evidence of wrong-doing has been unveiled.  worries about cyber-crime and sabotage have prompted many employers to consider monitoring employees. the developers behind the system claim it is a break-through in the way data is monitored and stored. but privacy advocates are concerned by the invasive nature of such software.  the system is a joint venture between security firm 3ami and storage specialists bridgehead software. they have joined forces to create a system which can monitor computer activity  store it and retrieve disputed files within minutes. more and more firms are finding themselves in deep water as a result of data misuse. sabotage and data theft are most commonly committed from within an organisation according to the national hi-tech crime unit (nhtcu) a survey conducted on its behalf by nop found evidence that more than 80% of medium and large companies have been victims of some form of cyber-crime. bridgehead software has come up with techniques to prove  to a legal standard  that any stored file on a pc has not been tampered with. ironically the impetus for developing the system came as a result of the freedom of information act  which requires companies to store all data for a certain amount of time.  the storage system has been incorporated into an application developed by security firm 3ami which allows every action on a computer to be logged. potentially it could help employers to follow the trail of stolen files and pinpoint whether they had been emailed to a third party  copied  printed  deleted or saved to cd  floppy disk  memory stick or flash card. other activities the system can monitor include the downloading of pornography  the use of racist or bullying language or the copying of applications for personal use. increasingly organisations that handle sensitive data  such as governments  are using biometric log-ins such as fingerprinting to provide conclusive proof of who was using a particular machine at any given time. privacy advocates are concerned that monitoring at work is not only damaging to employee s privacy but also to the relationship between employers and their staff.  that is not the case   said tim ellsmore  managing director of 3ami.  it is not about replacing dialogue but there are issues that you can talk through but you still need proof   he said.  people need to recognise that you are using a pc as a representative of a company and that employers have a legal requirement to store data   he added.
media gadgets get moving pocket-sized devices that let people carry around video and images are set to have a big year in 2005  according to industry experts.  last year saw the emergence of portable media players  such as the windows-based creative zen portable media player  the samsung yepp  the iriver pmc-100  and the archos av400 series among others. but this year  they are set to get smarter and more connected  to allow people to find more video to watch on them. archos launched its latest range of its linux-based portable media devices at the consumer electronics show in las vegas on friday. dubbed the pocket media assistant pma430  it crucially has wi-fi capability built-in for the first time.  consumers are showing a great thirst for devices that store all their media in one place for anywhere access   said henri crohas  chief of archos.  and now those consumers can stay connected and productive at the same time.  archos said the focus for the device is to be the second gadget in people s pockets  after the mobile.  unlike windows-based players  the archos av400 series devices have always been able to record from any video source  such as tvs  as well as playback. the content put onto the devices is copy protected so cannot then be swapped to another device.  recording is perhaps a crucial functionality for those who have not seen the point of portable video if there is not a lot of video to watch on it. and wi-fi connectivity opens up the possibility of content delivery via a high-speed wireless link. archos also announced that it would open up the software development kit to linux developers so that more applications could be created for the device. microsoft also made some announcements in the portable media arena at ces  primarily for us consumers though. it has agreed a content deal with personal video recorder company tivo  which bill gates also showcased in his keynote speech at ces. the tivo to go service means that us consumers will be able to take any programmes they record on their tivos and transfer it for free to watch on any of the windows-based portable media players or smartphones. it also said it had launched a service with mtv to let people watch comedy central  vh1 and country music tv on its devices. and a service is launching with msn to provide people with shortened versions of news  entertainment and other video on a subscription basis for download via the pc onto the portable devices. but the ability to record directly from tv  vcr  and digital cable and satellite boxes  which windows-based devices do not offer  certainly gives people more content to watch on the go too.  the increased capability of these devices  and the content deals that are being done  may go some way to persuading people to use them. recent research by jupiter suggested that people would prefer a device that was dedicated to music. only 13% of europeans wanted to watch video while on the move. more seemed interested in spending their cash on music-only devices.   this year  we are ready for an explosion of portable media   microsoft s mike coleman told the bbc news website.  we are very bullish about it. the fact that i can put photos on here too and share them is super-cool to the consumer   he added. the fact that europeans are far larger public transport users than americans is one reason why portable media will take off in the coming year too. there is a burgeoning market there for commuters to watch news and other programmes on their way to work. although microsoft s content distribution deals are for the us market at the moment  talks were  always on-going  with european content suppliers to offer similar services. various rights management issues have to be ironed out first however. but that does not prevent people from finding ways to create their own content to share online and swap on portable devices  particularly via those which are wi-fi enabled. the possibility is open for non-professional makers of video and audio to take advantage of the growing portable media market to distribute their work. ces  which runs from 6 to 9 january  showcases more than 50 000 new gadgets that will be hitting the shelves in 2005.
more power to the people says hp the digital revolution is focused on letting people tell and share their own stories  according to carly fiorina  chief of technology giant hewlett packard.  the job of firms such as hp now  she said in a speech at the consumer electronics show (ces)  was to ensure digital and physical worlds fully converged. she said the goal for 2005 was to make people the centre of technology. ces showcases 50 000 new gadgets that will be hitting the shelves in 2005. the tech-fest  the largest of its kind in the world  runs from 6 to 9 january.  the digital revolution is about the democratisation of technology and the experiences it makes possible   she told delegates.  revolution has always been about giving power to the people.  she added:  the real story of the digital revolution is not just new products  but the millions of experiences made possible and stories that millions can tell.  part of giving people more control has been about the freeing up of content  such as images  video and music. crucial to this has been the effort to make devices that speak to each other better so that content can be more easily transferred from one device  such as a digital camera  to others  such as portable media players. a lot of work still needs to be done  however  to sort out compatibility issues and standards within the technology industry so that gadgets just work seamlessly  she said.  ms fiorina s talk also touted the way technology is being designed to focus on lifestyle  fashion and personalisation  something she sees as key to what people want.  special guest  singer gwen stefani  joined her on-stage to promote her own range of hp digital cameras which ms stefani has helped design and which are heavily influenced by japanese youth culture. the digital cameras  which are due to go on sale in the us by the summer  are based on the hp 607 model. the emphasis on personalisation and lifestyle is a big theme at this year s ces  with tiny  wearable mp3 players at every turn and rainbow hues giving colour to everything. ms fiorina also announced that hp was working with nokia to launch a visual radio service for mobiles  which would launch in europe early this year. the service will let people listen to radio on their mobiles and download relevant content  like a track s ringtone  simultaneously. the service is designed to make mobile radio more interactive.  among the other new products she showcased was the digital media hub  a big upgrade to hp s digital entertainment centre. coming out in the autumn in the us  the box is a networked  high-definition tv  cable set-top box  digital video recorder and dvd recorder. it has a removable hard drive cartridge  memory card slots  and light scribe labelling software which lets people design and print customised dvd labels and covers. it is designed to contain all a household s digital media  such as pre-recorded tv shows  pictures  videos and music so it can all be managed in one place. the hub reflects the increasing move to re-box the pc so that it can work as part of other key centres of entertainment. research suggests that about 258 million images are saved and shared every day  equating to 94 billion a year. eighty per cent of those remain on cameras. media hubs are designed to encourage people to organise them on one box. ms fiorina was one of several keynote speakers  who also included microsoft chief bill gates  to set out what major technology companies think people will be doing with technologies and gadgets in the next 12 months. in a separate announcement during the keynote speech  ms fiorina said that hp would be partnering mtv to replace this year s mtv asia music award. mtv s asia aid will be held in bangkok on 3 february  and is aimed at helping to raise money for the asian tsunami disaster.
web radio takes spanish rap global spin the radio dial in the us and you are likely to find plenty of spanish-language music. but what you will not find is much spanish-language hip-hop.  hip-hop and rap are actually quite popular in the spanish-speaking world  but local artists are having trouble marketing their work abroad. but now  a us company is bringing rap and hip-hop en espanol to computer users everywhere. los caballeros de plan g are one of mexico s hottest hip-hop acts. they have a devoted fan base in their native monterrey. but most mexican hip-hop fans  not to mention fans in most of the spanish-speaking world  rarely get a chance to hear the group s tracks on the radio.   you can t really just go on the radio and listen to hip-hop in spanish... it s just not accessible   says manuel millan  a native of san diego  california.  it s really hard for the spanish hip-hop scene to get into mainstream radio. you usually have a very commercialised sound and the groups are not really known around the country or around the world.  millan and two friends set out to change that - they wanted to make groups like los caballeros de plan g accessible to fans globally.  mainstream radio stations were not going to play this kind of music  and starting their own broadcast station was economically impossible. so  millan and his friends launched a website called latinohiphopradio.com. the name says it all: it is web-based radio  devoted to the hottest spanish language rap and hip-hop tracks. the site  which is in both in english and spanish  is meant to be easy to navigate. all the user has to do is download a media player. there are no djs. it is just music streamed over the net for free. suddenly  with the help of the website  los caballeros de plan g are producing  export quality  rap.  the web might be just the right medium for spanish language hip-hop right now. the genre is in what millan calls its  infant stage . but the production values are improving  and artists such as argentina s mustafa yoda are pushing to make it better and better. mustafa yoda is currently one of the hottest tracks on latinohiphopradio.com.  he s considered the eminem of argentina  and the latin american hip-hop scene   millan says.  he really hasn t had that much exposure as far as anywhere in the world  but he s definitely the one to look out for as far as becoming the next big thing in the spanish-speaking world.  currently  the chilean group makisa is also in latinohiphopradio.com s top 10  as is cuban artist papo record.  every country s got it s own cultural differences and they try to put those into their own songs   millan says. latinohiphopradio.com has been up and running for a couple of months now. the site has listeners from across the spanish speaking world. right now  mexico leads the way  accounting for about 50% of listeners. but web surfers in spain are logging in as well - about 25% of the web station s traffic comes from there. that is not surprising as many consider spain to be the leader in spanish-language rap and hip-hop. millan says that spain is actually just behind the united states and france in terms of overall rap and hip-hop production. that might be changing  though  as more and more latin american artists are finding audiences.  but one spaniard is still firmly in latinohiphopradio.com s top 10. his name is tote king and manuel millan says that he is the hip-hop leader in spain. on his track uno contra veinte emcees  or one against 20 emcees  tote king shows he is well aware of that fact.  it s basically him bragging that he s one of the best emcees in spain right now   millan says.  and it s pretty much true. he has the tightest productions  and his rap flow is impeccable  it s amazing.  latinohiphopradio.com is hoping to expand in the coming year. millan says they want to include more music and more news from the world of spanish language hip-hop and rap.  clark boyd is technology correspondent for the world  a bbc world service and wgbh-boston co-production.
yahoo moves into desktop search internet giant yahoo has launched software to allow people to search e-mail and other files on their pcs.  the firm is following in the footsteps of microsoft  google and ask jeeves  which have offered similar services. search has become a lucrative and hotly-contested area of expansion for net firms  looking to extend loyalty beyond the web. with hard drives providing bigger storage  users could need more help to locate important files  such as photos.  the desktop search technology has been licensed from a us-based firm x1 technologies. it is designed to work alongside microsoft s outlook and outlook express e-mail programs. searching e-mail effectively is becoming increasingly important  especially as the amount of spam increases. according to research from message analysts the radicati group  up to 45% of businesses  critical information is stored in e-mail and attachments. yahoo s software can also work separately on the desktop  searching for music  photos and other files. users can search under a variety of criteria  including file name  size  date and time. it doesn t yet incorporate web searching  although yahoo has promised that future versions will allow users to search both web-based and desktop data.  we are all getting more and more files on our desktop but the real commercial opportunity lies with linking this through to web content   said julian smith  an analyst with research firm jupiter.  it is all about extending the idea of search and getting a closer relationship with consumers by organising not just how they search on the internet but the files on your computer as well   he said. search engines are often the first port of call for users when they go onto the web. the new foray into desktop search has rung alarm bells for human rights groups  concerned about the implications to privacy. and not everyone is impressed with the functionality of such services. alexander linden  vice president of emerging technologies at analyst firm gartner downloaded the google product but has since removed it.  it was just not very interesting   he said. he believes the rush to enter the desktop business is just a way of keeping up with rivals.  desktop search is just one of many features people would like but i m suspicious of its usefulness   he said. more useful would be tools that can combine internet  intranet and desktop search alongside improvements to key word searching  he said.
sony psp tipped as a  must-have  sony s playstation portable is the top uk gadget for 2005  according to a round-up of ultimate gizmos compiled by stuff magazine.  it beats the ipod into second place in the top ten essentials list which predicts what gadget-lovers are likely to covet this year. owning all 10 gadgets will set the gadget lover back £7 455. that is £1 000 cheaper than last year s list due to falling manufacturing costs making gadgets more affordable.  portable gadgets dominate the list  including sharp s 902 3g mobile phone  the pentax optio sv digital camera and samsung s yepp yh-999 video jukebox.   what this year s essentials shows is that gadgets are now cheaper  sexier and more indispensable than ever. we ve got to the point where we can t live our lives without certain technology   said adam vaughan  editor of stuff essentials. the proliferation of gadgets in our homes is inexorably altering the role of the high street in our lives thinks mr vaughan.  take digital cameras  who would now pay to develop an entire film of photos  or legitimate downloads  who would travel miles to a record shop when they could download the song in minutes for 70p   he asks. next year will see a new set of technologies capturing the imaginations of gadget lovers  stuff predicts. the xbox 2  high-definition tv and mp3 mobiles will be among the list of must-haves that will dominate 2006  it says. the spring launch of the psp in the uk is eagerly awaited by gaming fans.
google s toolbar sparks concern search engine firm google has released a trial tool which is concerning some net users because it directs people to pre-selected commercial websites.  the autolink feature comes with google s latest toolbar and provides links in a webpage to amazon.com if it finds a book s isbn number on the site. it also links to google s map service  if there is an address  or to car firm carfax  if there is a licence plate. google said the feature  available only in the us   adds useful links . but some users are concerned that google s dominant position in the search engine market place could mean it would be giving a competitive edge to firms like amazon.  autolink works by creating a link to a website based on information contained in a webpage - even if there is no link specified and whether or not the publisher of the page has given permission.  if a user clicks the autolink feature in the google toolbar then a webpage with a book s unique isbn number would link directly to amazon s website. it could mean online libraries that list isbn book numbers find they are directing users to amazon.com whether they like it or not. websites which have paid for advertising on their pages may also be directing people to rival services. dan gillmor  founder of grassroots media  which supports citizen-based media  said the tool was a  bad idea  and an unfortunate move by a company that is looking to continue its hypergrowth . in a statement google said the feature was still only in beta  ie trial  stage and that the company welcomed feedback from users. it said:  the user can choose never to click on the autolink button  and web pages she views will never be modified.  in addition  the user can choose to disable the autolink feature entirely at any time.   the new tool has been compared to the smart tags feature from microsoft by some users. it was widely criticised by net users and later dropped by microsoft after concerns over trademark use were raised. smart tags allowed microsoft to link any word on a web page to another site chosen by the company. google said none of the companies which received autolinks had paid for the service. some users said autolink would only be fair if websites had to sign up to allow the feature to work on their pages or if they received revenue for any  click through  to a commercial site. cory doctorow  european outreach coordinator for digital civil liberties group electronic fronter foundation  said that google should not be penalised for its market dominance.  of course google should be allowed to direct people to whatever proxies it chooses.  but as an end user i would want to know -  can i choose to use this service    how much is google being paid     can i substitute my own companies for the ones chosen by google  .  mr doctorow said the only objection would be if users were forced into using autolink or  tricked into using the service .
what high-definition will do to dvds first it was the humble home video  then it was the dvd  and now hollywood is preparing for the next revolution in home entertainment - high-definition.  high-definition gives incredible  3d-like pictures and surround sound. the dvd disks and the gear to play them will not be out for another year or so  and there at are still a number of issues to be sorted out. but when high-definition films do come out on the new format dvds  it will profoundly change home entertainment. for rick dean  director of business development for digital content company thx  a high-definition future is an exciting prospect. he has worked on the star wars dvd trilogy  finding nemo  the incredibles and indiana jones.  there was a time not so long ago when the film world and the video world were two completely separate worlds   he told the bbc news website.   the technology we are dealing with now means they are very much conjoined.  the film that we see in theatres is coming from the same digital file that we take the home video master   he says. but currently  putting a master feature film onto dvd requires severe compression because current dvd technology cannot hold as much as high-definition films demand.  as much as you compress the picture data rate wise  you also take qualities away from the picture that we fight so hard to keep in the master   he explains.  i would love to be able to show people what projects that we worked on really look like in the high-def world and i find it very exciting.   high-definition dvds can hold up to six times more data than the dvds we are used to. it will take time though to persuade people who spent money on dvd players to buy the different players and displays required to watch high-definition dvds in 18 months  time. mr dean is confident though:  i think if they see real hd [high-definition]  not some heavily compressed version of it  there is such a remarkable difference.  i have heard comments from people who say the images pop off the screen.   high-definition will mean some changes for those working behind the scenes too. on the whole  producing films for high-definition dvds will be easier in some ways because less compression is needed. equally  it may mean hollywood studios ask for more to be put onto the average dvd.  when we master movies right now  our data rates are running at about 1.2 gigabits per second   says mr dean.  our dvds that we put out today have to be squashed down to about five or six megabits per second.  that s a huge amount of compression that has to be applied - about 98%. so if you have anything that allows more space  you don t have to compress so hard.  studios could fit a lot more marketing material  games  and features  onto high-capacity dvds. currently  an entire dvd project can take up to three months  says mr dean. although the step of down-converting will be bypassed  this will realistically only save a day s work  says mr dean. one of the most time consuming elements is building dvd navigation and menu systems. on the fairly complex star wars disks  making sure the menu buttons worked took 45 human hours alone. if studios want to cash in on the extra space  it could mean extra human hours  for which someone has to pay.  if the decision on the studio side is that they are going to put a lot more on these disks  it could be more expensive because of all the extra navigation that is required.  and if studios do focus on delivering more  added value content   thinks mr dean  ultimately it could mean that they will want more money for it. those costs could filter down to the price ticket on a high-definition dvd. but if the consumer is not willing to pay a premium price  studios will listen  thinks mr dean.  high-definition throws up other challenge to film makers and dvd production alike. more clarity on screen means film makers have to make doubly sure that attention to detail is meticulous.  when we did the first hd version of star wars episode i  everybody was very sun-tanned  but that was make-up.  in the hd version of episode i  all these make-up lines showed up   explains mr dean. the restoration of the older star wars episodes revealed some interesting items too.   there are scans of a corridor [on the death star] and fairly plainly in one of those shots  there is a file cabinet stuck behind one of the doorways.  you never used to be able to see it because things are just blurred enough during the pan that you just didn t see it.  what high-definition revolution ultimately means is that the line between home entertainment and cinema worlds will blur. with home theatre systems turning living rooms into cinemas  this line blurs even further. it could also mean that how we get films  and in what format  will widen.  in the future we are going to look towards file delivery over ip [internet protocol - broadband]  giving a dvd-like experience from the set-top box to the hard drive   says mr dean. but that is some time off for most  and for now  people still like to show off something physical in their bookshelves.
gangsters dominate gaming chart video games on consoles and computers proved more popular than ever in 2004.  gamers spent more than £1.34bn in 2004  almost 7% more than they did in 2003 according to figures released by the uk gaming industry s trade body. sales records were smashed by the top title of the year gta: san andreas - in which players got the job of turning central character cj into a crime boss. the game sold more than 1 million copies in the first nine days that it was on sale. this feat made it the fastest selling video game of all time in the uk. although only released in november the sprawling story of guns  gangsters game beat off strong competition and by year end had sold more than 1.75 million copies. there were also records set for the number of games that achieved double-platinum status by selling more than 600 000 copies. five titles  including sony eyetoy play and ea s need for speed: underground 2  managed this feat according to figures compiled by chart-track for the entertainment and leisure software publishers association (elspa). electronic arts  the world s biggest games publisher  had 9 games in the top 20.  2004 was a  stellar year  said roger bennett  director general of elspa.  in a year with no new generation consoles being released  the market continued to be buoyant as the industry matured and the increasingly diverse range of games reached new audiences and broadened its player base - across ages and gender   he said. part of the success of games in 2004 could be due to the fact that so many of them are sequels. 16 out of the top 20 titles were all follow-ups to established franchises or direct sequels to previously popular games. halo  the sims  driver  need for speed  fifa football  burnout were just a few that proved as popular as the original titles. despite this fondness for older games  doom 3 did not make it to the top 20. movie tie-ins also proved their worth in 2004. games linked to shrek  the incredibles  spider-man  harry potter and lord of the rings were all in the top 20. elspa noted that sales of xbox games rose 37.9% during the year. however  sony s playstation 2 was the top seller with 47% of the £1.34bn spent on games in 2004 used to buy titles for that console. despite winning awards and rave reviews half-life 2 did not appear in the list. this was because it was only released on pc and  compared to console titles  sold in relatively small numbers. also the novel distribution system adopted by developer valve meant that many players downloaded the title rather than travel to the shops to buy a copy. valve has yet to release figures which show how many copies of the game were sold in this way.
britons fed up with net service a survey conducted by pc pro magazine has revealed that many britons are unhappy with their internet service.  they are fed up with slow speeds  high prices and the level of customer service they receive. 17% of readers have switched suppliers and a further 16% are considering changing in the near future. it is particularly bad news for bt  the uk s biggest internet supplier  with almost three times as many people trying to leave as joining.  a third of the 2 000 broadband users interviewed were fed up with their current providers but this could be just the tip of the iceberg thinks tim danton  editor of pc pro magazine.  we expect these figures to leap in 2005. every month the prices drop  and more and more people are trying to switch   he said. the survey found that bt and tiscali have been actively dissuading customers from leaving by offering them a lower price when they phone up to cancel their subscription. some readers were offered a price drop just 25p more expensive than that offered by an alternative operator  making it hardly worth while swapping.  other found themselves tied into 12-month contracts. broadband has become hugely competitive and providers are desperate to hold on to customers. 12% of those surveyed found themselves unable to swap at all.  we discovered a huge variety of problems  but one of the biggest issues is the current supplier withholding the information that people need to give to their new supplier   said tim danton  editor of pc pro.  this breaks the code of practice  but because that code is voluntary there s nothing we or ofcom can do to help   he said. there is a vast choice of internet service providers in the uk now and an often bewildering array of broadband packages. with prices set to drop even further in coming months mr danton advises everyone to shop around carefully.  if you just stick with your current connection then there s every chance you re being ripped off   he warned.
speech takes on search engines a scottish firm is looking to attract web surfers with a search engine that reads out results.  called speegle  it has the look and feel of a normal search engine  with the added feature of being able to read out the results. scottish speech technology firm cec systems launched the site in november. but experts have questioned whether talking search engines are of any real benefit to people with visual impairments.  the edinburgh-based firm cec has married speech technology with ever-popular internet search. the ability to search is becoming increasingly crucial to surfers baffled by the huge amount of information available on the web.  according to search engine ask jeeves  around 80% of surfers visit search engines as their first port of call on the net. people visiting speegle can select one of three voices to read the results of a query or summarise news stories from sources such as the bbc and reuters.  it is still a bit robotic and can make a few mistakes but we are never going to have completely natural sounding voices and it is not bad   said speegle founder gordon renton.  the system is ideal for people with blurred vision or for those that just want to search for something in the background while they do something else.  we are not saying that it will be suitable for totally blind people  although the royal national institute of the blind (rnib) is looking at the technology   he added. but julie howell  digital policy manager at the rnib  expressed doubts over whether speegle and similar sites added anything to blind people s experience of the web.  there are a whole lot of options like this springing up on the web and one has to think carefully about what the market is going to be   she said.  blind people have specialised screen readers available to them which will do the job these technologies do in a more sophisticated way   she added.  the site uses a technology dubbed panavox  which takes web text and converts it into synthesised speech. in the past speech technology has only been compatible with broadband because of the huge files it downloads but cec says its compression technology means it will also work on slower dial-up connections. visitors to speegle may notice that the look and feel of the site bears more than a passing resemblance to the better known  if silent  search engine google. google has no connection with speegle and the use of bright colours is simply to make the site more visible for those with visual impairments  said mr renton.  it is not a rip-off. we are doing something that google does not do and is not planning to do and there is truth in the saying that imitation is the sincerest form of flattery   he said. speegle is proving popular with those learning english in countries such as japan and china.  the site is bombarded by people just listening to the words. the repetition could be useful although they may all end up talking like robots   said mr renton.
broadband set to revolutionise tv bt is starting its push into television with plans to offer tv over broadband.  as a telecoms company  bt is moving to a content distribution strategy  andrew burke  chief of bt s new entertainment unit told the iptv world forum.  we want to be an entertainment facilitator   he said on the opening day of the london conference. the bbc is also trialling a service to play programmes over the net and has not ruled out offering it to non-licence fee payers overseas. the corporation s interactive media player (imp) is its first foray into broadband tv - known as iptv (internet protocol tv).   we see several opportunities for delivering the type of content that normally broadcasters find it difficult to get to viewers   said bt s andrew burke.  with more people on broadband  and connection speeds increasing  telcos around the world are looking for new ways to make money from it. increased competition between net service providers  encouraged by ofcom  has eroded bt s position in the market. it is looking for a good return on its investment in the technology which has made broadband over adsl a reality. it also sees delivering tv over broadband as a way of getting high-definition (hd) content to people sooner than they will be able to get it through conventional  regular broadcasts. the bbc s imp has just finished successful technical trials and is set for much larger consumer trials later in 2005. before it officially launches  the bbc must show the government how it offers value for money. delivering programmes over broadband offers clear public value  says the bbc  because it gives people more control  and more choice.  iptv is a similar idea to voip services  like skype. both use broadband net connections to carry information  like video and voice  in packets of data instead of conventional means. since it uses internet technology  iptv could mean more choice of programmes  more  more interactivity  tailored programming  and more localised content outside of conventional satellite  digital cable  and terrestrial broadcasts.  it is all part of the larger changing tv technology landscape and  like personal digital video recorders (pvrs)  gives people much more control over tv. broadcasters see iptv and pvrs as both as a threat and an opportunity. the bbc recognises that tv over broadband is a reality and aims to innovate with it  said rahul chakkara  controller of bbci s 24/7 interactive tv services. the imp is based on peer-to-peer technology  and lets people download programmes the bbc owns the rights to for up to seven days after broadcast.  iptv enables us to take back that programme to our audience at different times   said mr chakkara.   so we can tell our audience that that programme they paid for [via the licence fee]  they can access it any time they want.  it helps  said mr burke  that people are more au fait with terms like  digital    interactive   now that digital tv reaches more than 56% of uk homes. according to benoit joly from broadband telecoms firm thales  30% of europe cannot get satellite tv or digital tv. they could get iptv though. analysts say that iptv will account for 10% of the digital tv market in europe alone by the end of the decade. what needs to happen now  agree analysts  is for connection speeds to be bumped up to handle the service; 20mbps connections would be ideal. bt does not see itself as a broadcaster of iptv services  rather as an  enabler   said mr burke. its strategy is a  hybrid  approach  he explained  where over-the-air conventional broadcasts are supplemented with content over broadband.  initially appealing to niche markets  like sports fans  it will widen out. but iptv could be used for home-monitoring   pet cams   localised news services  and local authority tv  too says bt. it even suggests that it could target those households in the uk that do not own a computer  40% of the country.  broadband to them would not be about data and the net - that could come later for them - but about cheap phone calls and more choice of tv programmes. home choice already offers 10 000 hours of shows and channels  delivered over broadband to homes in london. with a broadband net subscription  you can also get your tv and phone service. through content deals and partnerships  it offers satellite as well as terrestrial channels  and bespoke channels based on what viewers pick and choose from its catalogues. it aims to expand nationally  but is seeing a lot of success with what it offers its 15 000 subscribers now  and aims to double uptake as well as reach by the summer. although still at a very early stage  iptv is another application for broadband that underlines its growing prominence as a backbone network - another utility like electricity.
warnings about junk mail deluge the amount of spam circulating online could be about to undergo a massive increase  say experts.  anti-spam group spamhaus is warning about a novel virus which hides the origins of junk mail. the program makes spam look like it is being sent by legitimate mail servers making it hard to spot and filter out. spamhaus said that if the problem went unchecked real e-mail messages could get drowned by the sheer amount of junk being sent.  before now many spammers have recruited home pcs to act as anonymous e-mail relays in an attempt to hide the origins of their junk mail. the pcs are recruited using viruses and worms that compromise machines via known vulnerabilities or by tricking people into opening an attachment infected with the malicious program. once compromised the machines start to pump out junk mail on behalf of spammers. spamhaus helps to block junk messages from these machines by collecting and circulating blacklists of net addresses known to harbour infected machines. but the novel worm spotted recently by spamhaus routes junk via the mail servers of the net service firm that infected machines used to get online in the first place. in this way the junk mail gets a net address that looks legitimate. as blocking all mail from net firms just to catch the spam is impractical  spamhaus is worried that the technique will give junk mailers the ability to spam with little fear of being spotted and stopped. steve linford  director of spamhaus  predicted that if a lot of spammers exploit this technique it could trigger the failure of the net s e-mail sending infrastructure. david stanley  uk managing director of filtering firm ciphertrust  said the new technique was the next logical step for spammers.  they are adding to their armoury   he said. the amount of spam in circulation was still growing  said mr stanley  but he did not think that the appearance of this trick would mean e-mail meltdown. but kevin hogan  senior manager at symantec security response  said such warnings were premature.  if something like this mean the end of e-mail then e-mail would have stopped two-three years ago   said mr hogan. while the technique of routing mail via mail servers of net service firms might cause problems for those that use blacklists and block lists it did not mean that other techniques for stopping spam lost their efficacy too. mr hogan said 90% of the junk mail filtered by symantec subsidiary brightmail was spotted using techniques that did not rely on looking at net addresses. for instance  said mr hogan  filtering out e-mail messages that contain a web link can stop about 75% of spam.
warnings on woeful wi-fi security companies are getting worse at keeping their wireless data networks secure.  a survey of wi-fi networks in london  frankfurt  new york and san francisco by rsa security found more than a third had basic security features turned off. by contrast last year s survey found that 15% of firms had failed to take basic steps to improve security. rsa warned that wi-fi s growing popularity made it much more likely that insecure networks would be found and exploited.  wireless or wi-fi networks have become hugely popular over the last few years in offices because they are easy to set up and make going online much more convenient. this popularity shows no sign of slowing reveals the annual rsa security and netsurity survey which found an annual 66% growth rate in the number of wireless nets being installed in london and frankfurt. although most firms do take steps to turn on the security functions built in to the wi-fi standard and protect themselves from attack  the survey found that a significant proportion were taking unnecessary risks. on average 33% of the wireless networks found by rsa and netsurity researchers in london  frankfurt  new york and san francisco had not used basic security systems. many firms were simply turning on their wireless net access points and use default settings that anyone familiar with wi-fi could easily find out. rsa said that 26% of wi-fi networks found london used default settings compared to 30% in frankfurt  31% in new york and 28% in san francisco. many users of wi-fi nets did not even turn on the encryption that scrambles data traffic between users and the access point helping them go online. this is despite a series of stories warning firms about the dangers of  drive-by hacking  in which computer criminals walk or drive around city centres using easy to use tools to spot wi-fi nets.  these figures are another stark warning to unsecured businesses to get their act together   said phil cracknell  chief technology officer at netsurity. as more public wi-fi hotspots appear and people become more familiar with using them  it was getting more likely that insecure would be found  warned mr cracknell.  accidental or intentional connection to a corporate network can bring with it a series of security issues including loss of confidential data and installation of malicious code   he said.
web logs aid disaster recovery some of the most vivid descriptions of the devastation in southern asia are on the internet - in the form of web logs or blogs.  bloggers have been offering snapshots of information from around the region and are also providing some useful information for those who want to help. indian writer rohit gupta edits a group blog called dogs without borders. when he created it  the site was supposed to be a forum to discuss relations between india and pakistan. but in the wake of sunday s tsunami  mr gupta and his fellow bloggers switched gears.  they wanted to blog the tsunami and its aftermath. one sri lankan blogger in the group goes by the online name morquendi. with internet service disrupted by the tsunami  morquendi started sending sms text messages via cell phone from the affected areas of sri lanka.  we started publishing these smses   says mr gupta.   morquendi was describing scenes like 1 600 bodies washed up on a shore  and people burying  and burying and burying them. people digging holes with their hands. and this was coming through an sms message.  we didn t have visual accounts on radio or on tv  or in the print media.  soon  thousands of web users around the world were logging on to read morquendi s first hand accounts. in one message  morquendi wrote about a sri lankan woman who was running home with a friend when the wave hit.  she was being swept away   morquendi s message read.  she grabbed a tree with one hand and her friend with the other. she says she watched the water pull her friend away.  mr gupta says the power of morquendi s text message blogs was palpable.  he was running around  looking for friends  burying bodies  carrying bodies   mr gupta says of morquendi.  i can t even begin to imagine the psychological state he was in when he was sending us reports  and doing the relief work at the same time.  he was caught between being a journalist and being a human being.   others blogs are helping to spread information about relief efforts. dina mehta is an indian blogger who s helping with the newly created south east asia earthquake and tsunami blog. she says the blog is not meant to be filled with first person accounts.  what we re doing is we re building a resource   she says.  anyone who says  ok  i want to come and do some work in india  volunteer in india  or in sri lanka or malaysia  this is the sort of one-stop-shop that they can come to for all sorts of resources - emergency help lines  relief agencies  aid agencies  contacts for them etc.   ms mehta also says she wishes that governments in the region would realise the power of blogs.  imagine if they had this resource available to them  if there was a disaster  how quickly you could funnel aid in  and get people to help   she says. bloggers in the united states are also getting involved. ramdhan yadav kotamaraja is originally from india  but now lives in dallas. mr kotamaraja wanted to help those affected by the tsunami by pooling money with concerned friends. so  he set up an online payment system on his website. then  says mr kotamaraja  the blogging world found out.  all my blogger friends started linking up my site  and i saw a lot of people other than my friends. i d say 70% of the donations came from people i don t know.  it s simply unbelievable to me  that people that i don t know will come and start donating.  news spreads quickly on weblogs  a phenomenon that helps bloggers expand their audience and scope. in sri lanka  blogger morquendi is recruiting others to help. one recruit calls himself heretic. in one of his latest posts  heretic asks:  have you ever seen fishing trawlers on the road  ever seen a bus inside a house   well   heretic writes   that was just the least affected areas - so you can just imagine - or can you   he concludes:  keep it blogged.   clark boyd is technology correspondent for the world  a bbc world service and wgbh-boston co-production.
file-swappers ready new network legal attacks on websites that help people swap pirated films have forced the development of a system that could be harder to shut down.  one site behind the success of the bittorrent file-swapping system is producing its own software that avoids the pitfalls of the earlier program. a test version of the new exeem program will be released in late january. but doubts remain about the new networks ability to ensure files being swapped are  quality copies .  in late december movie studios launched a legal campaign against websites that helped people swap pirated movies using the bittorrent network. the legal campaign worked because of the way that bittorrent is organised. that file-sharing system relies on links called  trackers  that point users to others happy to share the file they are looking for. shutting down sites that listed trackers crippled the bittorrent network. one of the sites shut down by the legal campaign was suprnova.org which helped boost the popularity of the bittorrent system by checking that trackers led to the movies or tv programmes they claimed to.  now the man behind suprnova.org  who goes by the nickname sloncek  is preparing to release software for a new file-swapping network dubbed exeem. in an interview with novastream web radio  sloncek said exeem would combine ideas from the bittorrent and kazaa file-sharing systems. like bittorrent  exeem will have trackers that help point people toward the file they want. like kazaa these trackers will be held by everyone. there will be no centrally maintained list. this  said sloncek  should make the system less vulnerable to legal action aimed at stopping people swapping pirated movies and music. the exeem software has been under development for a few months and is currently being tested by a closed group of users. an early public version of the software should be available before february. sloncek said that currently only a windows version of the software was in development. there were no plans for a linux or mac version. he said that costs of writing the software will be paid for by adverts appearing in the finished version of the program. despite suprnova administrator sloncek s involvement with exeem  the basic technology appears to have been developed by a firm called swarm systems that is based on caribbean island saint kitts and nevis.  users of the exeem system will be able to rate files being swapped to help stop the spread of fake files  sloncek told novastream.  dr johan pouwelse  a researcher at the delft university of technology who studies peer-to-peer networks  said exeem was the next evolution in file-sharing systems. but  he said  it would struggle to be as popular as bittorrent and suprnova because early versions were not taking enough care to make sure good copies of files were being shared.  exeem cannot prevent pollution   he said.  the rating system in exeem seems flawed because it is easy to insert both fake files and fake ratings   he said. studies have shown that organisations working for record labels and movie studios have worked to undermine kazaa by putting in fakes. by contrast moderators on suprnova made sure files being shared were high quality.  the moderators are the difference between having a system that works and one that s full of crap like kazaa   he said.  there is a fundamental tension between distribution and integrity   he said. mr pouwelse said that future versions of file-sharing systems are likely to incorporate some kind of distributed reputation system that lets moderators prove who they are to the network and rate which files are worth downloading. when big files were being shared moderation systems were key  said mr pouwelse. he added that the legal attacks on bittorrent had driven people away from sites such as suprnova but many users had simply migrated to other tracker listing sites many of which have seen huge increases in traffic.  it s hard to compete with free   he said. no-one from the motion picture association of america was immediately available for comment on the file-sharing development.
apple ipod family expands market apple has expanded its ipod family with the release of its next generation of the digital music players.  its latest challenges to the growing digital music gadget market include an ipod mini model which can hold 6gb compared to a previous 4gb. the company  which hopes to keep its dominant place in the digital music market  also said the gold coloured version of the mini would be dropped. a 30gb version has also been added to the ipod photo family. the latest models have a longer battery life and their prices have been cut by an average of £40. the original ipod took an early lead in the digital music player market thanks to its large storage capacity and simple design.  during 2004 about 25 million portable players were sold  10 million of which were apple ipods. but analysts agree that the success is also down to its integration with the itunes online store  which has given the company a 70% share of the legal download music market. mike mcguire  a research director at analyst gartner  told the bbc news website that apple had done a good job in  sealing off the market from competition  so far.  they have created a very seamless package which i think is the idea of the product - the design  function and the software are very impressive   he said. he added that the threat from others was always present  however.  creative  other microsoft-partnered devices  real  sony and so on  are ratcheting up the marketing message and advertising   he said. creative was very upbeat about how many of its creative zen players it had shipped by the end of last year  he said. its second-generation models  like the creative zen micro photo  is due out in the summer. it will have 5gb of memory on board.  digital music players are now the gadget of choice among young americans  according to recent research by the pew internet and american life project. one in 10 us adults - 22 million people - now owns a digital music player of some sort. sales of legally downloaded songs also rose more than tenfold in 2004  according to the record industry  with 200 million tracks bought online in the us and europe in 12 months. the ifpi industry body said that the popularity of portable music players was behind the growth. analysts say that the ease of use and growth of music services available on the net will continue to drive the trend towards portable music players.  people are also starting to use them in novel ways. some are combining automatic syncing functions many of them have with other net functions to automatically distribute diy radio shows  called podcasts. but 2005 will also see more competition from mobile phone operators who are keen to offer streaming services on much more powerful and sophisticated handsets. according to mr mcguire  research suggests that people like the idea of building up huge libraries of music  which they can do with high-capacity storage devices  like ipods and creative zens. mobiles do not yet have this capacity though  and there are issues about the ease of portability of mobile music. mr mcguire said apple was ensuring it kept a foot in the mobile music door with its recent deal with motorola to produce a version of itunes for motorola phones.
santy worm makes unwelcome visit thousands of website bulletin boards have been defaced by a virus that used google to spread across the net.  the santy worm first appeared on 20 december and within 24 hours had successfully hit more than 40 000 websites. the malicious program exploits a vulnerability in the widely used phpbb software. santy s spread has now been stopped after google began blocking infected sites searching for new victims.  the worm replaces chat forums with a webpage announcing that the site had been defaced by the malicious program. soon after being infected  sites hit by the worm started randomly searching for other websites running the vulnerable phpbb software. once google started blocking these search queries the rate of infection tailed off sharply. a message sent to finnish security firm f-secure by google s security team said:  while a seven hour response for something like this is not outrageous  we think we can and should do better.   we will be reviewing our procedures to improve our response time in the future to similar problems   the google team said. security firms estimate that about 1m websites run their discussion groups and forums with the open source phpbb program. the worst of the attack now seems to be over as a search conducted on the morning of the 22 december produced only 1 440 hits for sites showing the text used in the defacement message. people using the sites hit by santy will not be affected by the worm. santy is not the first malicious program to use google to help it spread. in july a variant of the mydoom virus slowed down searches on google as the program flooded the search site with queries looking for new e-mail addresses to send itself to.
